GUIDANCE FOR
PERCEIVING MINDS
Al-Huda Wat-Tabsiratu Liman Yara
Hadrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmadas
The Promised Messiah and Mahdi
Founder of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community
Guidance For
Perceiving Minds
English Translaton of
Al-Huda Wat-Tabṣiratu Liman Yarā
After witnessing the persistent bigotry and rejection of the truth by
Indian scholars, Haḍrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the Promised Messiah,
peace be upon him, diverted his attention towards the scholars of the
Arab lands, in particular the Levant and Egypt, that perchance someone
amongst them may support the truth.
Therefore, the Promised Messiahas sent copies of his Arabic treatise
I'jazul-Masiḥ to some Egyptian scholars and editors of magazines, and
sent a copy to Sheikh Muhammad Rashid Rida, the editor of al-Manar
[The Lighthouse] for review.
on
Other editors of magazines wrote complimentary reviews
Ijazul-Masiḥ, praising its eloquence and quality of language; however,
Rashid Rida, without presenting testimonies from Arabic grammarians,
criticised the book's composition, writing that its text was filled with
forced fluency, and was against Arabic idiom. In order to reveal the truth,
the Promised Messiah as beseeched Allah the Exalted for guidance.
Subsequently, it was placed in his heart to pen this Arabic treatise
Al-Hudā Wat-Tabṣiratu Liman Yara which was first published in 1902.
This is the English translation of that book.
9781848 806795
GUIDANCE FOR
PERCEIVING MINDS
(Al-Huda wat-Tabṣiratu Liman Yarā)
Guidance for Perceiving Minds
(Al-Huda wat-Tabsiratu Liman Yarā)
Hadrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad
The Promised Messiah and Mahdi as
Founder of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama'at
ISLAM INTERNATIONAL PUBLICATIONS LTD.
ISLAM
INTERNATIONAL
PUBLICATIONS LTD
Guidance for Perceiving Minds
(Al-Huda wat-Tabṣiratu Liman Yarā)
Written by Haḍrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad
The Promised Messiah and Mahdi, peace be upon him,
Founder of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community
First published in Urdu in Qadian, India, 1902
First English translation published in the UK, 2024
© Islam International Publications Ltd.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be repro-
duced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any informa-
tion storage and retrieval system, without prior written permis-
sion from the Publisher, Islam International Publications Ltd.
Published by
Islam International Publications Ltd.
Unit 3, Bourne Mill Business Park
Guildford Road
Farnham, Surrey GU9 9PS, UK
ISBN: 978-1-84880-679-6
1098765432
CONTENTS
About the Author.
Publisher's Note.........
Foreword..........
............ix
............xi
χυ
Guidance for Perceiving Minds
What is wrong with the Muslims &
What is the Treatment for this Time? ......
..............22
The Current State of the Muslim Kings....
.............24
The Scholars of this Era
.42
The Editors of Magazines & Newspapers. .................76
The Philosophers & Logicians ....
.80
The Sheikhs of this Ag...........
....81
The Other Sects of Muslims
The External Trials ..............
...... 86
.87
Treatment to these Trials ....
.........92
........... 115
Shrine of a Prophet in Khanyar, Srinagar, Kashmir....
vi
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
Names of Prophets
Glossary...
Index..........
125
127
129
Hadrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad of Qadian
The Promised Messiah & Mahdi as
 ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Hadrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad as was born in 1835 in Qadian, India.
From his early life, he dedicated himself to prayer and the study
of the Holy Quran and other scriptures. He was deeply pained
to observe the plight of Islam, which was being attacked from all
directions. In order to defend Islam and present its teachings in
their pristine purity, he wrote more than ninety books, thousands
of letters, and participated in many religious debates. He argued
that Islam is a living faith which can lead man to establish com-
munion with God to achieve moral and spiritual perfection.
Hadrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad as started experiencing
Divine dreams, visions, and revelations at a young age. In 1889,
under Divine command, he started accepting initiation into the
Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Divine revelations continued
to increase and God commanded him to announce that He had
appointed him to be that very Reformer of the Latter Days as
prophesied by various religions under different titles. He claimed
to be that very Prophet who the Holy Prophet Muhammad as
said would be raised as the Promised Messiah and Mahdi. The
X
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
Ahmadiyya Muslim Community is now established in more than
200 countries.
After his demise in 1908, the second manifestation of
Divine power was demonstrated, and the institution of Khilafat
(successorship) was established to succeed him in fulfilment
of the prophecies made in the Holy Quran, presented by the
Holy Prophet Muhammad sas, and in the book of the Promised
Messiah as, Al-Waṣiyyat. Haḍrat Mirza Masroor Ahmadaba is the
Fifth Successor to the Promised Messiahas and the present Head
of the worldwide Ahmadiyya Muslim Community.
PUBLISHER'S NOTE
Please note that, in the translation that follows, words given in
parentheses ( ) are the words of the Promised Messiahas. If any
explanatory words or phrases are added by the translators for
the purpose of clarification, they are put in square brackets [ ].
Footnotes given by the publisher are marked '[Publisher].
References to the Holy Quran contain the name of the surah
[i.e. chapter] followed by a chapter:verse citation, e.g. Surah al-Ju-
muah, 62:4, and count Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim ['In the
name of Allah, the Gracious, the Merciful'] as the first verse in
every chapter that begins with it.
The following abbreviations have been used:
sas sallallahu 'alaihi wa sallam, meaning 'peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him', is written after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad șas.
as 'alaihis-salām, meaning 'peace be on him, is written after
the names of Prophets other than the Holy Prophet
Muhammadsas.
ra raḍiyallahu 'anhu/anhã/'anhum, meaning 'may Allah be
pleased with him/her/them', is written after the names of
the Companions of the Holy Prophet Muhammad as or of
the Promised Messiah as.
xii
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
rta rahmatullah 'alaih/'alaiha/'alaihim, meaning 'may Allah
shower His mercy upon him/her/them', is written after
the names of those deceased pious Muslims who are not
Companions of the Holy Prophet Muhammad as or of the
Promised Messiah as.
aba ayyadahullahu Ta'ala binaṣribil-Aziz, meaning 'may Allah
the Almightyhelp him with His powerful support, is written
after the name of the present head of the Ahmadiyya Muslim
Community, Hadrat Mirza Masroor Ahmadaba, Khalifatul-
Masiḥ V.
Readers are urged to recite the full salutations when reading the
book. In general, we have adopted the following system estab-
lished by the Royal Asiatic Society for our transliteration.
て
at the beginning of a word, pronounced as a, i, u preceded
by a very slight aspiration, like h in the English word
honour.
th-pronounced like th in the English word thing.
-
ḥ – a guttural aspirate, stronger than h.
ċ kh-pronounced like the Scottish ch in loch.
خ
-
dh pronounced like the English th in that.
- strongly articulated s.
d similar to the English th in this.
-
b- strongly articulated palatal t.
له
-
- strongly articulated z.
a strong guttural, the pronunciation of which must be
learnt by the ear.
ع
gh غ
- a sound similar to the French r in grasseye, and to the
PUBLISHER'S NOTE
xiii
German . It requires the muscles of the throat to be in the
'gargling' position to pronounce it.
9- a deep guttural k sound.
,
a sort of catch in the voice.
Long vowels by:
ā for
or ĭ (like a in father).
or
(like ee in deep).
ད
2
(like oo in root).
i for s
ū for
و
ހ
Other vowels by:
ai for s
au for,
(like i in site).
(resembling ou in sound).
The consonants not included in the above list have the same pho-
netic value as in the principal languages of Europe. As noted above,
the single quotation mark is used for transliterating which
is distinct from the apostrophe 'used for ..
&
We have not transliterated some Arabic words which have
become part of the English language, e.g. Islam, Quran, Mahdi,
jihad, Ramadan, and ummah. The Royal Asiatic Society's rules of
transliteration for names of persons, places, and other terms, are
not followed throughout the book as many of the names contain
non-Arabic characters and carry a local transliteration and pro-
nunciation style.
FOREWORD
After witnessing the persistent bigotry and rejection of the truth
by Indian scholars, Haḍrat Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the Promised
Messiah and Mahdi, peace be upon him, diverted his attention
towards the scholars of the Arab lands, in particular the Levant
and Egypt, that perchance someone amongst them may support
the truth.
Therefore, the Promised Messiahas sent copies of his Arabic
treatise I'jazul-Masiḥ to some Egyptian scholars and editors of
magazines, and sent a copy to Sheikh Muhammad Rashid Rida,
the editor of al-Manār [The Lighthouse] for review.
The editors of Manazir and al-Hilal wrote complimentary
reviews on Ijazul-Masiḥ, praising its eloquence and quality of
language; however, Rashid Rida, without presenting testimonies
from Arabic grammarians, criticised the book's composition,
writing that its text was filled with forced fluency, and was against
Arabic idiom. When this review was published in Hindustan,
the Indian scholars used it to reaffirm their opposition to the
Promised Messiahas.
In order to reveal the truth, refute the charges and clinch the
argument, the Promised Messiah as beseeched Allah the Exalted for
guidance. Subsequently, it was placed in his heart to pen a treatise
for this purpose and demand the like thereof from the editor of
al-Manar and all those that were ready to oppose him from these
lands. Therefore, the Promised Messiah as supplicated with extreme
devotion and sincerity, and this prayer was accepted. He writes,
xvi
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
I turned to Allah with utmost eagerness, dedicating myself
to ardent supplication and prayer, until signs of a response
became evident, uncertainty lifted, and I was given
strength in writing that book. Once published and the
chapters completed, I will send it to him. If he provides
a good response and an excellent rebuttal, I will burn my
books, kiss his feet, seek his assistance, and align myself
with his standards in measuring people. And here, I swear
by the Lord of Creation, reaffirming the covenant of this
oath. (See page 11).
When Al-Huda wat-Tabṣiratu Liman Yara was published in June
1902, a copy was sent as a gift to Rashid Rada, who reproduced
a portion of this book pertaining to the migration of Jesus as to
Kashmir in his magazine and commented that this notion was
rationally and scripturally plausible. Nevertheless, he was unable
to write a response to this book and disprove the prophecy of the
Promised Messiahas.
The present English rendering was meticulously prepared by
Reem Shraiky. The review, formatting and indexing of the book
was carried out by Abdul Quddus Arif. Valuable assistance was
provided by Dr Ayman Odeh, Ibrahim Ikhlaf, Mirza Abdul
Wahab and Labeed Ahmad Mirza. May Allah bless them all for
their efforts.
Al-Haj Munir-ud-Din Shams
Additional Wakīlut-Taṣnīf, London
July 2024
وَالتَّبْصِرَةُ لمزيرى
۱۲ جون سن ۹۱۹
ع
الثمن في جلد
محصولداك
دي پي
۱۲
ار
طبع في دار الامان قاديان المطبع ضِياء الاسلام
امام الحكيم عالية الملكة
تعداد اشاعت ..
Facsimile of the original Arabic title page for Al-Huda wat-Tabsiratu Liman Yara, printed in 1902
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
79
nothing but deceptive smiles and nonsensical talk in opposition.
They cannot achieve eloquence without lying, joking, and aban-
doning justice. They do not utter precious words without mixing
in falsehood and ignorance. They want to distract the crowds with
comedies, tempting them with both humorous and tear-jerk-
ing scenes. They aim to steal hearts, even if it leads to sin. They
speak with hypocrisy or for the sake of winning support, hoping
to receive favour from the wealthy and prosperous. Their goal is
to amass tons of money, elevate their status, and increase their
influence. For this reason, they carefully observe their gatherings
and places of association. If they are disappointed, they curse the
places they frequented. Many of them live as atheists and natu-
ralists, viewing religion with disdain. Their eyes are veiled from
the beauty of faith, and their hearts harbour aversion towards it.
They see lying as trivial, magnifying insignificant matters. Their
acts will never stay unchecked, as there is tomorrow beyond today.
I perceive that the fumes of arrogance have stifled their breath
and eroded their foundation. Many appear as shells devoid of
pearls, and ears of corn void of wheat. They rise to despise hon-
ourable individuals at the slightest difference in opinion. Among
them are those who exhibit cruelty, treating benefactors badly. If
they witness a neighbour's misfortune, they respond with hurtful-
ness, harshness, and ingratitude, showing no mercy or assistance.
How can Islam be supported by those content with such
qualities? How can good be expected from them while they har-
bour these vices? Except for those who are righteous and inclined
towards virtuous deeds. It is hoped that a day will dawn upon
them, making them followers of the religion, aiding it with hon-
esty and steadfastness.
80
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
The Philosophers & Logicians
Perhaps you might say after that philosophers and logicians are
able to reform the corruptions of this time, because they speak
with argument and proof, and reach correct conclusions after pro-
viding evidence. So, confusion will not exist after the presentation
of clear evidences.
So, we say that these sciences are useful, as you claim, with-
out a doubt. At times, they reveal the betrayal of those who lied
and deceived, clearing away suspicions. Whoever learns them will
speak with prestige and eloquence, and their writing will flow
smoothly. They will command respect among disbelievers and
recognise the treachery of the corrupt.
With these sciences, one can enhance their narration, explore
every matter thoroughly, critically assess their understanding, and
rebuke the opponent with evidence. Their words will captivate,
as their speech will be like pearls and gems. With these sciences,
they will not suffer hardships, nor fear obstacles in speaking. They
will present ideas that are refined and mature. They will navigate
the paths of difficulty, seeking solutions. Perhaps they will devote
themselves to thinking and enduring hardships to save souls from
the burden of calamity.
This is your opinion and the opinion of those with similar
hearts, but the truth is that these philosophers, wise men, and
people of reason and knowledge are unable to ward off this afflic-
tion. Rather, they are a great affliction to the followers of Islam
and the seekers of truth. Everything they feed Muslim children is
nothing but poison. They have taken them out of the fair breeze
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
81
and left them in scorching winds. Evil indeed is what they have
taught and what they have learned.
The Sheikhs of this Age
Perhaps you might say that the Sheikhs of this time, who are con-
sidered among the friends of the Gracious [God], are reformers.
Therefore, let the Muslims hasten to them, for they are effacing
themselves in the love of the Lord of Majesty. They do not waste
time in arrogance and vanity. Instead, they want people to follow
the path of guidance and to be transferred from the courtyard of
desires to the position of annihilation. They preferred reciting the
Quran over playing with friends. You see them sitting in rooms,
retreated for the worship of the Lord of the Creations.
So listen to me, we believe that there is a group of righteous
people in this Ummah, even if people consider them disbelievers
and harm them with all kinds of slander and accusation, but we
find that most of the sheikhs of this age are arrogant hypocrites,
far from the paths of the Gracious [God]. They show themselves
in gatherings like an ordinary ram, but they are in fact like a wolf
or a tiger.
They praise themselves in competition, and say, “We are the
people of Allah. Since our youth we have obeyed none but the
Lord of the Worlds. Indeed, our souls are purified, our cups are
full, and we are among the poor and those who submit to Allah,
the Most High and the Lord of Honour.” There is no dignity left
in them without shedding tears, and no tenderness in their hearts.
There is no innovation they did not invent, and no conspiracy
82
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
they do not adopt. In their gatherings, there is nothing but danc-
ing, tearing garments, and causing napes to bleed.
Despite the vastness of the world for them, their dispositions
changed; they transformed prayer rooms into places for their
couches [to rest]. This is the reason for their deficiency in prudence
and wisdom, as well as their permissiveness and lack of modesty.
If Allah deprives a soul of piety, which is the most honourable
of blessings, He makes that soul like an animal. If He seals a heart,
He removes from it the subtleties of knowledge and makes it cow-
ardly, placing a barrier between it and the courage of faith, so they
become like women, not like men, and nothing remains of them
other than women's adornments, with some pride and chivalry.
They will be stripped of the garment of brilliant wisdom, eloquent
and wonderful words, and they will not be given a share of the
fragrance of knowledge and the scent of Surah al-Fatihah.
The lamp of Islam is dimmed by the dirt of their oil, and they
act like pack animals, dedicated only to supplying food for their
households. The burden of their children breaks their backs, and
they consider their worries to be like heavy mountains. They con-
trive with all kinds of deceit, so what do they have to do with
the religion of Allah, the Most Majestic? You can discern their
thoughts by seeing their appearance and their minds by their arro-
gance. It has become clear from the veracity of the signs and suc-
cessive observations that most of these mystics have no share of
piety, nor a hint of wisdom.
They see a violation of the sanctity of religion, but they do
not leave their rooms, and their hearts do not ache like the pro-
tectors of faith. Rather, they are preoccupied with songs, singers,
and musical instruments while reciting poetry. They do not know
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
83
what has happened to the Ummah of the Best of Creations sas, and
what they read from their sheikhs comes before consolation. They
collect everything that is given, even if it is Zakāt money and alms
You think they are alive, but they are like the dead, except for
a few of Allah's servants who are like grains of sand in the desert.
You find most of them drowning in innovations and evil deeds.
Alas for them! What will they say to Allah after death? As the
responsibility for the sin of the audacity of Christians and the
Christianised [against Islam] is no doubt on these heedless sheikhs
and scholars, for all the temptations did not occur except through
the negligence of the scholars, the mystics, and the leaders. They
will be asked about them on the Day of Recompense. They said,
"We are a community of scholars and mystics.” However, they
engaged in unrighteous deeds through audacity and sought their
livelihood through machinations and hypocrisy. You can observe
that some of their scholars abandoned the pursuit of knowledge
and instead turned to farming the earth. They failed to honour
their position and neglected seeking Allah's grace through suppli-
cations. They mistakenly believed there was pride in agriculture,
forgetting the Hadith that explicitly mentioned “disgrace."¹
The crux of the matter is that they chose other occupations,
such as farming. How can they shift their focus to debt and sup-
port the religion? How can the thoughts of a heap of wheat and
1. The Holy Prophetas said, "If you sell anything on credit to anyone, on
the condition that you will buy it back for a lower price, take hold of the
tails of cattle, become pleased with agriculture, and give up Jihad, Allah
will make disgrace prevail over you and will not remove it till you return
to your religion" (Sunan Abi Dāwūd, Kitābul-Buyū, Hadith no. 3003).
[Publisher]
84
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
the thoughts of the Ummah coexist in one heart? Whoever falls
upon dry plants will find the door to the state closed.
pro-
They beg people like female mourners. They lose subsistence,
thinking only of food. You see some of them pawning the graves of
their fathers to pay off their creditors, in order to spend what the
charitable fund entrusted to them and to eat what was offered to
the bodies of their ancestors. And if you say, "O ye, may Allah
tect you, do you think that your father's grave is something that
could be bought and sold?” He would say, “Be quiet, you curious
one. You do not know what we know and see." Then he recounts
a thousand miracles of his ancestors, claiming that no milk comes
out of the breasts of their camels without their succession.
They go around with a pot under their arms, a stick in their
hands, a rosary to go through its beads, beards they have length-
ened and drawn out, garments they have greened, and skin they
have freshened, as if they were saints or spiritual guiding stars,
then after a while it appears that they are dogs or wolves, and their
ultimate concern is a sack, in which dirhams, dry date or raisins is
filled.
You will not find in them any sign of their poverty other than
the braids falling under their ears, just like the scholars who know
nothing except leading prayers and the call to prayer. You do not
find a trace of blessings in their rooms, rather, you find everyone
behaving as if he is the father of Abū Zayd', lying and engaging
in evil behaviour. They devour people's money by claiming to be
1. Abu Zayd as-Surūji, a fictional character in Hariri's Maqāmāt who
possesses eloquence and good speech, which he uses to deceive people
to obtain money from them. [Publisher]
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
85
Qutbs or Abdal, yet they know nothing other than circumambu-
lating graves and engaging in satanic innovations.
Some of them sing in meetings, and dance like the courtesan
in assemblies, and to renew heresies, they gather at the beginning
of each year. You find in them the machinations of the cat and
the mouse, and the poison of the snake and the scorpion. There is
nothing in them of the religion except its name, nor of the Shariah
except its text.
They abandoned the commandments of Allah, the Lord of
Majesty, and fabricated another law like an impostor, and fab-
ricated themselves various types of acts of worship, the traces of
which are not to be found in the Book of Allah nor in the narra-
tions of the Master of the Prophets and the Best of Men sas. Then
they say, "We believe in the Seal of the Prophetsas" while they
have departed from the religion like their fellow innovators. Was
a revelation sent down to them from heaven, and by it the Quran
and the Sunnah of the Master of the Prophets as were abrogated?
Of course not. Rather, they followed the devils and preferred
making lawful what is forbidden and the desires of the soul over
what was revealed by the Most Merciful. They brought innova-
tions from outside the religion and introduced heresies after our
established and trustworthy Prophetas. They wore garments other
than those of the Muslims and overturned most matters as if they
were not among the believers
Musical instruments are more beloved to them than the reci-
tation of the Quran. The lies of poets appear prettier in their eyes
than the verses of Allah, the Most Gracious. They have departed
from religion as an arrow departs from a bow, and they have tram-
pled upon Allah's commands completely. You do not see in them
86
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
an ounce of adherence to the Sunnah, nor a wick of the Prophet's as
life. Many of them have opened the doors to making things lawful
and have resorted to the doctrine of pantheism in order to be gods
and find relief from the burdens of worship.
They say that the desires of many people were fulfilled through
their supplications, in order to let them believe that this is the case
and that they are among the saints, and so that people should seek
them in their homes as they seek the righteous. When the Book of
Allah or the words of His Messengeras are read to them, it brings
them no joy. However, if a stanza of poetry is read, they begin
dancing. Whoever Allah curses, who will open his eyes? Let them
do as they please.
The Other Sects of Muslims
You have previously heard mention of the notables and honoura-
ble Muslims, so perhaps you think that their common people are
immune from committing sins. Know that, like their chiefs, they
have never refrained from committing sins or prohibitions. You
see them deprived of enthusiasm, overly gluttonous, and perishing
from the poison of heedlessness. They eat each other like worms
of excrement. They abandon Allah's commands without excuse.
Lying, immorality, indecency, miserliness, deceit, meanness and
hatred have spread among them. They drink an overflowing cup
of wine, and wake up to gambling and singing, abandoning mod-
esty. They say, "We are Muslims,” but they do not repent of the
impurity of the wine jars, as if they do not believe in [God] the
One that compensates. They lie when giving testimonies out of
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
87
greed for the least reward, and exceed the limit of fairness when
they treat with hostility.
They forgot the conditions of piety, and overlooked the rights
of brotherhood. They have fallen ill with a disease that cannot be
treated by a doctor or philosopher. Neither the wise nor the fool-
ish were spared by them, until the time of pre-Islamic ignorance
returned after it had passed. Thus, [Spiritual] water was lost, and
every person was deceived by its mirage. Their betrayal appeared
in their eyes, tongues, asceticism, and worship.
There is no crime left that does not exist among Muslims,
they combined in their actions the destruction of the rights of
Allah and the rights of His creation. Among them are thieves,
murderers, forgers, liars, adulterers, prisoners of immoral habits,
unjust traitors, grave worshippers, idolaters, and those who live in
the clothing of permissiveness and atheism. There is no crime in
which they do not have a share, as you know. If you doubt, ask a
prison blacksmith.
The External Trials
The greatest trial in this country is that of atheism and apostasy.
You see apostates walk in our country like spreading locusts.
Muslims are trampled under the feet of priests, their hearts are
overturned and their dispositions are like an inside-out garment.
They became passionate about the machinations of the People
of the Cross, and the issues of infallibility, atonement, and sacri-
fice. You see that they lure people into their religion with every
tool and means, even if it is a girl. They attract everyone who is
88
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
famished and miserable, to a god carved after Mosesas, so every-
one who seeks a host comes to them to take a loaf of bread. They
drive the ignorant and hungry people to the churches, which
are the root of destruction and riots. They made them desirous
of a life of luxury. Before that, they were like wanderers in a way
that had no provision, hunger increased the pain in their stom-
achs, so they preferred bread over religion, as you can see. They
drank from their cup and were stained with their filth. Indeed,
they entered our lands as someone knocking on doors at night,
stripped of his clothes, and they put the miserable to sleep while
keeping the happy away from rest. Many went astray because of
their instructions and were stung by their serpents until they were
imbued with their characteristics and entered the courtyard of
their religion.
There was not a man among them who would deny what
had befallen them or pull out the arrow that struck them. They
embraced freedom completely, and separated between the mother
and the infant. A group of Muslims apostatised, lied and insulted
the Chief of the Messengers $as. And you see that others have risen
to bid farewell to Islam and reject the Best of Mensas. As if the
saddle was prepared, and the journey was about to start. They dis-
played the symbol of Christianity, and took off all garments of
faith. Those who converted to Christianity did not spare a minute
without using it for humiliation and belittlement. They misled
Allah's creation like the accursed Satan. Those who were sons of
Muslims and their descendants became their soldiers and helpers,
they mastered all arts of plotting to gather every kind of hunting
for themselves.
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
89
There is no doubt that they created a great disorder and made
decayed bones a god, deceiving the ignorant people of India with
the beauty of openness and the maliciousness of the intent. They
wasted the pearls of Islam for dung plated with silver and a white-
wash shelter. They turned people from guidance to going astray,
and from right to left. They sharpen their tongues like an incisive
sword and deliberately abandon the path of glorification and hon-
our. Their churches are a place for camels to kneel and rest after a
long journey. You do not see a town in the country without find-
ing in it a group of apostates, they converted to Christianity due
to a share of money, not by arrows. Likewise, a third of Islam was
raided, our loved ones were taken away from us, and our broth-
ers became hostile to us. It rained until the ground turned into
slippery mud. They invaded our country, burned our livers, and
corrupted our children.
Those who are involved in corruption and apostasy are of
three groups: one group openly abandoned the religion of their
ancestors.
The second group are those who look as Muslims, but their
hearts are leprous from atheism. They studied new sciences, ate
from its porridge, and became like atheists. They do not fast or
pray, rather you see them laughing at those who fast and worship,
for they are closer to atheism than to faith, and to Satan than
to the Most Gracious. They do not believe in the Resurrection,
Heaven, Hell, angels, or the revelations which are the focal
points of our Prophet's teachings, the Chief of all Good $as. They
entered the party of the Christian philosophers and came out of
it in the clothes of atheists. They trusted in their lightning, yet it
90
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
only came from barren clouds, and they were deceived by their
apparent sincerity, while in reality, they are swindlers. Their hearts
turned black as if it were a dark night or skin. They lost their ears
and eyes, and arrogance of philosophy overwhelmed them like
madness. They say that we drink fresh water, while the common
people drink only dirt.
And a people other than them wore the clothes of Christians,
they say, "We are Muslims,” and yet they do not pray or fast, even
if they were not mocking Islam. You do not find any garments of
faith clothing them, rather you see their emblem like that of the
People of the Cross. They only marry their daughters, and praise
their wisdom. They sold the Shariah and piety, for the world, like
a man who sold his crops before they ripened. If you look carefully
at their characteristics and reflect on their traits, you will not see
traces of the light of believers on their faces, nor the appearance
of the righteous. Are these the youngsters of our people who will
be relied upon in the coming days, and will be remembered with
praise and exaltation?
You see Islam in our time as a prisoner who is locked up, or an
animal which is hunted. Most of the boys who study in the priests'
schools, resemble the People of the Cross. They abandoned what
is clean, preferring carrion. They chose the dung of misguidance,
just as they chose the popular sciences, and they did not leave
the schools until they left their religion. They crowded on the
filth, and gathered for the dirt. The evil and the influence of the
Christians teachers are greater than that of the priests. Most of the
Muslim children are studying in the schools of these misguided
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
91
people, so "to Allah we belong and to Him shall we return" on the
condition of Muslims.
Their liberated women come to the homes of Muslim women,
whispering in their hearts all kinds of tricks and care. Some
Muslim women may apostatise, so they take them out like thieves,
[So, you can imagine] what happens to the hearts of those who are
attached to the religion [as a result of this]. Many orphans of this
religion may come to them, so they evangelise them. They num-
ber in the thousands and increase every day, composed of desolate
people and those whose parents died from the plague or other
accidents. Then the priests gather them from different places, they
remained as hostages with them until they became Christians.
Swine was offered to them and they ate it. They were requested to
curse the Chosen One sas, so they cursed him, and became the first
of the unbelievers.
REMEDY TO THESE TRIALS
It has been proven from the above that none of these groups are
capable of reforming people or repelling the evil whisperers. So
far, the ultimate goal has not been reached through them, and
people have not risen to the heights of honesty and integrity by
these arguments.
You have not seen any of them reform those that corrupt, or
have their words touch the hearts of the criminals, or have their
admonition stop the evil and make men and women repentant.
How can one expect righteousness from them when their hearts
have become corrupted? They are like a water-skin that has rot-
ted. Can the blind guide the blind? Can someone whose fever
does not stop cure the sick? Is there a man among
them who can
reach the light of certainty? Can the blind show others the way?
Is it possible for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, or for
wolves to graze sheep?
We accept that scholars preach, but we do not accept that they
learn from it. We accept that they speak, but we do not accept that
they act. Is there a more shameful defect than preaching without
practice? Can the pessimist be expected to embody optimism? So
leave all of these groups with their scheming and toil, and wait;
perhaps Allah will bring about His decree.
By Allah, these are trials that will not be resolved by argu-
ments, consultations, forums, gathering of hosts on the borders of
94
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
the enemy, or by any other helpers. They are nothing but among
the arrogant ones. The example of an ignorant person who flaunts
his knowledge is like a puppy that opens its eyes before its time, or
like a wolf racing against a goshawk in flight.
Know, O comforters of Muslims and healers of the afflicted,
that the people's remedy lies in heaven, not in the hands of the
rational. Read the stories of the past people in the Clear Book,
for Allah's practice remained unchanged for the later generations.
Do you appeal to your kings, scholars, sheikhs, and wise men to
tend to the sick? May Allah forgive you! I fail to grasp the purpose
of your perspectives. Glory to Allah! What path have you cho-
sen? Through which valleys have you traversed? Do you believe it
is not yet time for the Imam, that he remains distant from these
days? Yet, you witness first-hand the prevalence of misguidance
and the deluge of ignorance. So, why do you not recognise the
signs of the times and feel anguish over what has transpired?
When you are informed that someone has reached twenty
years with the vigour of youth, you readily understand their
maturity. Then, why do you not grasp the opportune moments to
uphold the faith and discard doubt, despite witnessing the radi-
ance of certainty.
You see the appearance of Islam as a sick person trampled
under pain, and you see the retreat of the religion of Islam to com-
plete humiliation. Faults were attributed to it after it was described
with virtues, then the calamities that have befallen you are contin-
uous. We do not see among you servants of religion when this
misguidance floods, even if you were requested to do this for a
reward. Rather, every soul went to its desires and claimed that
goodness lies in fulfilling them. They forgot the commandments
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
95
of the Gracious [God], which they had been taught in the Quran,
and it became clear that they had weakened the mediation of the
accepted Messenger sas, felt that the Book of Allah is false, and
rejected everything that had transmitted to them.
They took seriousness as futile and considered pure gold to be
an alloy. By Allah, I have always thought about their conditions
and delved into the jungle of their imagination, but I did not find
in them anything but the beasts of desires and the beasts of oppres-
sion and darkness. They roam the lands without the accompani-
ment of a guard and fight the enemy without a quiver. Their words
do not negate the suspicions of the doubters or pull out the arrow
of the objectors. Rather, they agree with the Christians in many
misguidances, and accompany them in most cases. However, the
Christians openly speak what is in their hearts, and whatever they
conceal or screen became clear.
As for these people, they do not acknowledge the beliefs they
hold, and they are like a trap for the hunter. They meet the priests
with a cheerful face, like a lover and companion, not with a sharp
tongue nor a free heart. They are displeased with inference from
the Quran, but are pleased when it is said that so-and-so narrated
from so-and-so. They want to acquire wealth through speeches, to
fill the stomachs of their little ones. They prefer food over unique
gems [of knowledge] and do not care about those who disobey
Allah's religion after eating scrumptious food. They cry over their
miserable life in the morning and evening and do not stop cry-
ing. They are not shy, do not follow the paths of guidance, do not
mention the imminence of destruction, and when they are called
to food, they want to devour entire villages.
They say with their tongues, "Do not think of me as a burden,
96
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
and do not make food for me," while their hearts desire sweets, des-
serts, and all that is sweeter, everything that runs down the throat
and passes through the veins, tender meat, and Syrian kebab, with
water sparkling with ice to suppress this need and cool down the
hot morsels.
Then, despite this, they feel that a farewell should not be paid
to them except with two dinars, or that whatever is in the house
should be given to them blindly. And if food is presented to them
that they find displeasing while eating, they curse the one who
invited them ten times, mentioning him every hour and insult-
ing him out of arrogance and pride, for not fulfilling their wish
and not satisfying their desire. Likewise, their harms increased
and their damage spread. So, how could the reformation of reli-
gion be hoped for from these people? Can the trait of angels be
hoped for from Satan? Rather, they are enemies of religion in the
guise of a friend, with the face of a monotheist and the heart of a
heretic They insist that Jesus as is among the living', and they send
him down from heaven, while they know that he died and joined
the dead. The news of his death is present in the Furqān, so in
what testimony do they believe after the Quran? They say that he
is infallible from the touch of Satan, and they have forgotten what
our Lord said,
إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ
1. They also claim that birds are not only Allah's creation, but some of
them are of Allah, and some are Jesus' creation. So think about what is
the difference between them and the Christians. [Author]
2. Surely, thou shalt have no power over My servants (Surah al-Hijr,
15:143). [Publisher]
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
97
I do not know what this baseness and negligence is. Is the Master
of the Messengers as not among the infallible ones? Indeed, he is
and the curse of Allah is upon liars.
O heedless people! Till when will you wait for Jesus as while
the Day of Judgment is near? Do you claim that he is one of the
living? Rather, he is among the dead. And I know his grave, so do
not be among the ignorant. Gather together around me, and I will
guide you if you are seekers of truth. There is no greater sin under
heaven than claiming the life of Jesusas, and the heavens might
well-nigh burst thereat. Rather, he is one of those who perished.
By Allah, it is the truth, and I was informed of this from the
Quran and then by the revelation of the Lord of the Worlds.
Whoever says that he is alive has slandered Allah and contra-
dicted the words of the Clear Book. You have been waiting for his
descent for a long time, so is there a happy soul among you?
Look, O extremists who wait, did you find what you wanted
and what you had asked for? Are you confident about the thing
you believe in? Are your hearts at peace with it, O aggressors?
Rather, you help the Christians and support them. Many people
have turned away because of your words, so will you not abandon
these words and stop?
Then you say that we are making every effort for Islam. O
honourable people, which Islam do you mean? Do you mean the
Shiite or Ibadi Islam, for whom there is no salvation without spew-
ing curses? Or do you mean the Wahhabi sect, or the Muqallids or
the Mutazilites? Or do you mean the Islam of the innovator mys-
tics and those who follow the path of permissibility and immo-
rality? Or the Islam of naturalists who deny the angels, heaven,
hell, resurrection, miracles of the prophets, and the acceptance of
98
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
prayers? Those who mock fasting and praying and prefer the paths
of desires? Or another Islam in your heart that you not reveal to
any of your loved ones or enemies?
O dear ones! Reflect on the state of this time, where the Ummah
is divided into so many groups that its unity seems unlikely except
by the Hand of the Gracious God. They accuse each other of dis-
belief, and conflicts may escalate from mere argument to fighting.
Therefore, contemplate: Can you reconcile them and unite them
in one open land after removing these mountains? Of course not!
These are tasks beyond your capacity. Can you perform an act that
is solely the prerogative of Allah, the Lord of Majesty? Allah will
not gather these people until the trumpet is blown from heaven.
When the trumpet is blown, they will all gather. Let whoever can
hear, listen. By “trumpet” here, I do not mean what is commonly
imagined, but rather the Promised Messiah who rose for this call.
There are no dearer and greater trumpets than the hearts of the
Messengers of Allah. The true trumpets are their hearts, breathed
into to unite people upon one word without division. It has been
the practice of Allah to send someone from the Ummah to reform
it, attracting people through him to His pleasing paths. Allah does
not leave truth as a vague matter.
Yet, alongside this, there is another scourge and a great catastro-
phe: the remedy that Allah intended to rectify these scourges and
avert these calamities is something that the people and their schol-
ars are not satisfied with, and which the common people and their
elders regard with disdain. Allah sent His Promised Messiah dur-
ing the trials of the cross, just as He sent Jesus son of Maryas, when
the Mosaic chain was disrupted. It was indeed necessary for Him
to equalise the two chains so that there would be no superiority
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
99
of the first one, making them identical like two sandals. Thus, he
sent our Prophet and Master Muhammad, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him, and made him like Moses as, He spoke to him
and taught him what He taught.
Then, when a period of time had passed since the migration of
the Holy Prophet sas, similar to the period that had passed between
Jesus as and Moses as, the Ummah was divided into sects, and calam-
ities and misery were poured upon Islam, just as the Jews were
divided and went astray in the time of Jesus as after Moses as, Allah
sent the likeness of the son of Maryas in this era, so that the two
chains would be identical. The first like the first, and the last like
the last in all qualities and traits.
This is something to be grateful for, not to deny or show ingrat-
itude. It was the duty of Muslims to receive this news with great
eagerness, like a thirsty person [receiving water], and to consider
it one of the greatest blessings of the Most Gracious. However,
they chose to follow the words of people and disbelieved in the
Quran. They did not believe in the likeness of Jesusas, just as the
Jews did not believe in Jesus as before. Rather, they rejected him
just like what happened in the past.
So, today, they are in the same state of disobedience; two
groups of rejecters, with similar dispositions, fulfilling what the
Best of Men and Jinn sas said about them. They would only be
pleased if Jesus son of Maryas, were to descend from the second
heaven, placing his palms on the wings of the angels, adorned in
two garments dyed with saffron. They are distressed that Allah will
send His Promised Messiah from this Ummah, as He promised
in chapters an-Nur, at-Taḥrīm, and al-Fātiḥah [of the Quran],
and who can be more truthful than Allah in word, O people of
discernment?
IOO
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
If
They say that Allah will bring down Jesus as from his position,
disturb the purity of his days, and return him to the abode of trials
without sins. This is nothing but slander, and they have no proof
for it. Rather, Allah caused him to die and placed him in Paradise,
as mentioned in the Quran. His grave is close to these countries.
you seek further explanation, let me tell you his story that is
proven among Muslims and the People of the Cross. It is not a
postulate held by just one group, but rather something agreed
upon by everyone endowed with reason. It is not a fabrication; we
witnessed it with the utmost clarity, and the eye neither deviated
nor wandered.
It is proven conclusively that Jesus as migrated to the land
of Kashmir, after Allah had saved him from the cross with His
immense grace', and he remained there for a long time until he
died and joined the dead. His grave is still present in the town of
Srinagar, one of the greatest cities of this land.
The residents of that area unanimously agreed and repeatedly
said that it is the grave of a prophet who was a prince from the
Children of Israel, and his name was Yüz Asaf so let those who
seek evidence ask them. It is known among their common people
that his original name was Īsā Ṣāḥib and that he was a prophet
who migrated to Kashmir about 1900 years ago.
1. We have examined close to a thousand volumes of medical books and
found a blessed remedy called Marham-e-Īsā [Ointment of Jesusª³]. It
has been proven by the testimonies of Roman, Greek, Jewish, Christian,
and other expert physicians that this ointment was composed by the
disciples. They all wrote in their books that it was made for the wounds
of Jesus as, and it was also mentioned in the book The Canon of Medicine
[al-Qanun fit-Tibb] by Avicenna. So, consider this, O people of enlight-
enment: is this the one who was raised to the highest heavens? (Author)
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
ΙΟΙ
They agreed on this news, and in fact they have old books in
which these stories are found in Arabic and Persian, including a
book called Ikmāluddin and other famous books.
I have seen in the books of the Christians that they claim that
Yüz Asaf was a disciple of Jesus as and wrote this explicitly. There
are no people among them who did not translate this story into
their language, and built a church in his name in some of their
countries. There is no doubt that the claim that he was a disciple is
self-evidently false, as none of Jesus' disciples was the son of a king
and the claim of prophethood was not heard from them.
Then, despite this, Yüz Asaf called his book the Gospel, and
the Prophet of the Gospel was none other than Jesus as. So, take
what has become clear from the truth and leave the hearsay. If you
are looking for details, read a book called Ikmaluddin, and you
will find in it everything that cools the burning thirst.
This fact is further supported by this that many of the cities
in Kashmir were named after ancient cities, I mean cities that
were in the land of Jesus' advent and their nearby villages, such as
Homs, Gilgit, Skardu, and others that we left out of brevity. This
is something you cannot overlook; it is the source of hidden truth
for which the Christians were called ad-Dallin [those that have
gone astray.] Allah gave them this name in Surah al-Fatihah to
highlight their misguidance and to emphasise that the doctrine of
Jesus' life is the mother of their misguidance, akin to the mother
of the Book of the Purified Scriptures. If they had not raised him
to heaven with his physical body, they would not have made him
one of the gods, and it would not be possible for them to return to
monotheism without abandoning this belief. So, Allah revealed
this matter out of mercy for this Ummah, and proved with clear
IO2
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
evidence that Jesus as was not crucified and was not raised to
heaven. His exaltation was not something new or unique to him;
rather, the elevation of his soul was similar to the elevation of his
fellow prophets.
As for the specific mention of his being raised in the Quran, it
was to refute what the Jews and the People of the Cross claimed,
for they thought that he was crucified and cursed according to
the Torah's judgment, and cursing is incompatible with being
exalted; in fact, it is the opposite, as is well known to the wise.
Allah responded to these two groups by saying,
بَلْ رَّفَعَهُ اللهُ إِلَيْهِ
What is meant by this is that Jesusas is not cursed, but rather one
of those who are exalted and honoured before God's eyes.
The rejection of the Jews was merely about the spiritual ele-
vation that the crucified person did not deserve, and they do not
consider the elevation of the body to be the path of salvation.
Thus, searching for it is idle talk that does not involve cursing and
sin. For Abrahamas, Isaacas, Jacobas, and Moses as, none of them
were raised to heaven with their physical body, as is no secret, and
there is no doubt that they were saved from the curse and made
close to Allah and were saved by His grace. Indeed, they were the
Chiefs of the Survivors.
So, if raising the body to the heavens was one of the conditions
for salvation, then the Jewish belief would be that their Prophets
1. On the contrary, Allah exalted him to Himself (Surah an-Nisa', 4:159).
[Publisher]
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
103
were raised with their bodies to the heavens. In short, the raising
of the body was not a sign of the people of faith among the Jews,
and their rejection was nothing but raising the soul of Jesus as, and
that is what they say to this day.
If we assume that the Almighty's saying,
بَلْ رَّفَعَهُ اللهُ إِلَيْهِ
Was to explain the raising of Jesus' body to heaven, then where
is the mention of the raising of his soul, which would purify him
from the curse and testify to his exoneration? As mentioning it was
necessary to refute what the Jews and Christians wrongly claimed,
and that is sufficient for you if you are of people of maturity and
intelligence. Do you think that Allah has left out the explanation
of raising the soul that saves Jesus as from what was adjudicated to
him by the Mosaic law, while He was concerned with mentioning
the raising of the body, which is not related to something that
entails a curse according to this group?
Rather, it is a nonsensical matter that became well-known
among the Christians and the common people, and there is no
truth in it. The only thing that motivated the Christians to do that
was the insistent attack of the Jews, and their saying that Jesus as is
cursed because he was crucified, like the wicked, and the one who
is crucified is cursed according to the Torah, and there is no room
for escape
here, so the land became too strait for the Christians
because of these attacks, and they became in the hands of the Jews
1. On the contrary, Allah exalted him to Himself (Surah an-Nisa', 4:159).
[Publisher]
104
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
like captives. So, they invented the trick of Jesus' ascension to
heaven, hoping to purify him from the curse by this slander.
and
There was no escape from that famous incident that became
known among
the elite and the common people. The cross neces-
sitates a curse as per the agreement of all the Jewish groups
their great scholars. Therefore, the story of Jesus' ascension with
his body was invented as a ploy to exonerate him. It was not
accepted due to the lack of witnesses, so they returned, forced to
accept the obligation of the curse, and they said that Jesus as bore it
to save his community.
These excuses were nothing but an act at random; then, after a
while, they followed their desires, and intentionally made the son
of Maryas as a partner to Allah. So, the ascension of Jesus as and his
bearing of the curse became a belief among the Christians after
three hundred years. Then Muslims followed some of their ideol-
ogies during the dark age after passing of the [first] three centuries
[of Islam].
And know, may Allah guide you, that our Messenger, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him, did see Jesus as on the night of
the Mi'raj among the souls of dead. Indeed, there is a sign in this
for those endowed with reason. Every believer's soul is raised after
death, and the gates of heaven are opened for him. So, how did
Jesus as reach the dead and their places even though he was alive?
Know that it is false and has no truth in it. It was fabricated when
the Jews mocked and cursed him based on the text of the Torah.
It is not said that Jesus as met the dead as our Prophet sas met
them on the night of Mi'raj. According to the correct doctrine,
the Mi'rāj was a sublime vision with spiritual awakening, as is not
hidden from the enlightened mind. Only the spirit of our Master
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
105
and Prophetas had ascended to heaven with a luminous body and
not his physical body created from dust. It is not possible for an
earthly body to be raised to heaven; this is a promise from Allah,
the Lord of Power and Glory. If you are in doubt, read,
أَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الأَرْضَ كِفَاتًا أَحْيَاء وَأَمْوَاتًا
So ponder, do you deny the Quran for the sake of the son of
Maryas? Fear Allah out of piety, and look at His saying,
فَلَمَّا تَوَفَّيْتَنِي
And do not harm your Lord as you harmed me.
The idolaters asked our Master, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, to ascend to the heaven if he was truthful and accepted
[by God]. It was said,
3
قُلْ سُبْحَانَ رَتِي هَلْ كُنْتُ إِلَّا بَشَرًا رَّسُوْلاً
So, what do you think, is not the son of Maryas a human being like
the Best of Messengers sas? Or do you forge lies against Allah and
give Jesus as precedence over the Best of the Prophets sas?
Indeed, Jesus as did not ascend to heaven. Surely, the curse of
1. Have We not made the earth so as to hold, the living and the dead?
(Surah al-Mursalāt, 77:25-26) [Publisher]
2. But since Thou didst cause me to die (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:118).
[Publisher]
3. Say, 'Holy is my Lord! I am not but a man sent as a Messenger' (Surah
Bani Isrā'il, 17:94). [Publisher]
106
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
Allah is upon liars. Allah bore witness that he had died, and who
is more truthful than Allah, Lord of the Worlds? Do you not
reflect upon God's saying, Glory be to Him,
وَمَا مُحَمَّدُ إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ
Or is there a lock on your heart?
Consensus was reached on it before by the Companions, and
[Umar] al-Faruqa retracted his statement after hearing this verse,
so why do you not retract your statement when we have presented
many verses before you? Do you disbelieve in the Quran or have
you forgotten the Day of Recompense? While Allah said,
فِيهَا تَحْيَوْنَ وَفِيهَا تَمُوتُونَ
So how did Jesus as live to the age of two thousand in heaven? Why
do
you not think?
The truth is, and I only speak the truth, that Jesus as died, and
his soul was raised and he joined the dead. While the Promised
Messiah is from you, as Allah promised in Surah an-Nür. This is a
clear matter and not like a hidden secret. As stated in the Hadith
of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, he is,
1. And Muhammad is only a Messenger. Verily, all Messengers have passed
away before him (Surah Al-e-Imran, 3:145). [Publisher]
2. Therein shall you live, and therein shall you die (Sūrah al-A'rāf, 7:26).
[Publisher]
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
إِمَامُكُمْ مِنْكُمْ
107
And whoever disbelieves in the testimony of the Quran and
Hadith is not a Muslim.
Authentic and proven history has informed us that Jesus as did
not die on the cross, and this is something the likes of which have
been found before and it is not a miracle, and all the Gospels tes-
tify that the disciples saw him after he came out of the grave, went
home and joined his brethren. They walked with him for seventy
leagues, spent the night with him and ate meat and bread with
him.
What a pity for you if after that you ask for proof. Do you
think that the ladder to heaven was only seventy miles from the
place of the Cross? So, Jesus as was forced to flee and reach its
strange staircase? Rather, he fled, migrating in accordance with
the practice of the Prophets, for fear of the enemies. He was afraid
that his news would be investigated, and his secret would be
exposed, so he chose an unknown and remote route, which was
between the Samaritan villages.
The Jews used to abandon them and did not walk through
them out of pessimism and bad omens. So, look at the map of the
paths of the lands that he went through out of fear, and I will draw
its map here so that you will increase your insight, and will know
that Jesus' ascension to heaven is an accusation against him and
one of the most heinous slanders.
1. Your Imam from among you (Ṣaḥiḥ al-Bukhārī, Kitābu Aḥādīthil-
Anbiya', Babu Nuzuli Isabini Maryama, Alayhimas-Salam, Hadith
no. 3449; see also Ṣaḥiḥ Muslim, Kitābul-Īmān, Hadith no. 244).
[Publisher]
108
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
Was there a tribe of the Children of Israel in heaven, so he
went to them to show the convincing proof? If this was not the
case, what necessity led his feet to heaven? What is his excuse for
not conveying his message to his people who are spread through-
out the country and in need of guidance?
What is most astonishing is that people named Jesus as a Nabī
Sayyāḥ [traveling prophet] and say that he travelled paths that
were not trodden upon, nor were birds guided to them. He cov-
ered all or most of the earth, walked the secure and insecure lands
and saw everything that existed in that time. Yet, they say that at
the time of crucifixion, he was raised to heaven immediately, and
he did not leave his homeland until he was invited to the Lord of
Majesty. What is this contradiction? Do you understand? What
are these differences? Can you reconcile them?
say-
So, the truth is, and I only speak the truth, that the other
ing is correct, and as for the saying that Jesus as was raised to heaven,
it is rejected. Because ascending to heaven before completing the
mission of conveying the message to all tribes was a clear disobe-
dience and an ugly crime. It is known that the Children of Israel
during the time of Jesus, peace be upon him, were dispersed and
spread across the countries of India, Persia and Kashmir, so it was
his duty to reach them, meet them, and guide them to the path of
the Almighty Lord.
Abandoning an obligation is a disobedience, and turning away
from an astray people who are awaiting guidance is a great crime.
Infallible prophets are indeed exalted from such crimes, which are
the most heinous of sins. Then after that I will
map the path that
Jesus as chose when migrating, which is this:
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
109
Jaffa
Emmaus
Jerusalem
Bethany
Golgotha
Kingdoms related
to the Jewish Sects
Path Jesus's took as he fled in hiding
Mediterranean Sea
Villages related to the
Samaritan as well
Kingdoms related to Galillee
Nazareth
Jordan River
Lot Lake
[Dead Sea]
Other Kingdoms under Caesar's Rule
Tiberias Lake
IIO
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
In summary, there is no doubt, suspicion, or question that when
Allah graciously saved Jesus as from the trial of the cross, he migrated
with his mother and some of his companions to Kashmir, which
was an elevated land with meadows, springs of running water, and
a collection of marvels. Our Lord, the Supporter of the Prophets
and the Helper of the Oppressed, referred to him in His saying,
وَجَعَلْنَا ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَأَمَّهُ آيَةً وَآدَيْنَاهُمَا إِلَى رَبْوَةٍ ذَاتِ قَرَارٍ
وَمَعِينٍ
There is no doubt that al-Iwa' [granting refuge] is sought only
after calamity, fatigue, and anguish, and this word is used exclu-
sively in this sense. This is the truth without
doubt or suspi-
cion², and this disturbing state in the events of the Messiah's life
can only be attributed to the event of the Crucifixion.
any
1. And We made the son of Mary and his mother a Sign, and gave them
refuge on an elevated land of green valleys and springs of running water
(Surah al-Mu'minūn, 23:51). [Publisher]
2. Know that the word al-Iwa' and its derivatives appear in many places of
the Quran, all of which are mentioned in the sense of protection from
calamity out of gratitude. As Allah the Exalted said,
أَلَمْ يَجِدُكَ يَتِيمًا فَآوَى
[Did He not find thee an orphan and give thee shelter? (Sūrah
ad-Duḥā, 93:7)]
This means that God granted relief after difficulty. And Allah said in
another place,
إِذْ أَنْتُمْ قَلِيلٌ مُّسْتَضْعَفُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ تَخَافُونَ أَن يَتَخَطَّفَكُمُ النَّاسُ فَأَوَاكُمْ
[And remember the time when you were few and deemed weak in
the land, and were in fear lest people should snatch you away, but
He sheltered you (Sūrah al-Anfāl, 8:27)].
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
III
There is no land in the entire world, near or far, that matches
the height of the mountains and valleys of Kashmir in the eyes
of the All-Knowing and All-Seeing. You cannot disprove nor dis-
credit this statement.
As for the word Qarar [meadows] in the verse, it indicates
stability in that land with security and well-being, without the
hindrance of disbelievers and evildoers. There is no doubt that
Jesus, peace be upon him, did not have a settlement in the land
of the Levant, and he was expelled from one land to another by
the wretched and mean Jews. He did not see a settlement except
in the Kashmir plan, and this is what our Lord, the All-Knowing,
referred to in this verse. As for al-Ma'ul-Ma'in, it is a reference
to clear and gushing springs found in this region, and that is why
people likened that land to paradise.
There is no word about the Messiah's ascension to heaven in
the Gospels of Matthew or John, and there is a mention of his
journey to Galilee after the Crucifixion. This is the truth in which
we believe. The disciples hid this travel for fear of being pursued
by the Jews, and they expressed that he was raised to heaven as an
So see how God explained the truth of al-Īwa' and treated you thereof.
He narrated through the words of Noah's son,
سَاوِي إِلَى جَبَلٍ يَعْصِمُنِي مِنَ الْمَاءِ
[I shall soon betake myself to a mountain which will shelter me
from the water (Surah Hüd, 11:44)].
The son was meant to seek refuge in a high mountain after seeing the
affliction. So, explain to us what affliction descended upon the son of
Maryas and his mother more severe than the affliction of the Crucifixion?
Then, what place did Allah give them refuge in other than the hills of
Kashmir after that difficult day? Do you disbelieve in what Allah has
revealed, even though the Day of Judgment is near? (Author)
112
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
answer to the verdict of the curse and to distract the imagination
of the envious enemy. Then there came an evil generation after
them who were very sycophantic and slow-witted. They consid-
ered this concealment to be true, as is the behaviour of the igno-
rant, and they deified the son of Maryas, and even seated him on
the throne of the Lord of Majesty.
young
While it was just a way to conceal the truth, and there was
not even an inch of physical ascension. You have heard that Jesus as
died in the land of Kashmir, and his grave is known to the
and old. So do not deify the dead; ask forgiveness for them and
declare the unity of your Majestic and Mighty Lord. The heavens
are almost bursting from this falsehood. By Allah, he is dead, so
fear Him and the Day of Resurrection. Pray and invoke blessings
on Muhammadsas, who brought you divine light, was the embodi-
ment of this light and came from [God] the Light.
grave
I have mentioned that Muslims believe the aforementioned
grave is the grave of Jesusas, while Christians claim it is the
of one of his disciples. The matter is limited to these two options,
but there is no evidence supporting the second option. It seems to
be based on whims and desires, for the disciples were nothing but
Jesus' special companions and chosen supporters. None of them
was considered a prince or a prophet; they were merely servants of
the Messiah. Therefore, it is proven that this is the grave of Jesus as,
the Prophet of Allah. What more evidence do you require after
this clear proof?
Ask those who raised him to heaven and are waiting for his
return like fools. Death is better than clear ignorance. Today, the
truth of the words of Allah Almighty has become apparent,
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
1
فَلمَّا تَوَفَّيْتَنِي
113
What they were fabricating has been invalidated. Glory be to God
who established the truth, nullified falsehood, and revealed what
they were concealing. Repent to Allah, O aggressors. To which
statement after this do you cling?
I do not wish to prolong the research in this brief treatise,
as I have written sufficiently. If you wish, you may read my more
extensive books in Arabic. However, I would like to enhance your
knowledge about the meaning of the name Yüz Asaf which is con-
sidered a second name for the one buried in this grave according
to the residents of this area and all Christians without exception.
Know that it is a Hebrew compound composed of the word Yasu
[Jesus as] and the word Āsaf; the meaning of Yasu' is salvation.²
It is used for those who have survived accidents and storms. As
for the word Asaf, it means the one who gathers together wide-
spread groups, and it is the name of the Messiah in the Gospel, as
is well known to those with knowledge and experience, and it was
1. But since Thou didst cause me to die (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:118).
[Publisher]
2. It was customary for the Jews to name their children Yasu', meaning
salvation, as a matter of optimism and to seek protection from diseases
such as smallpox, tooth decay, and measles, fearing their children might
die from these frightening illnesses. Likewise, Maryas named her son
Yasu, meaning Jesus, hoping he would live and not succumb to small-
pox or other diseases. Those who claim that the meaning of Jesus is
"the saviour" are liars and charlatans. They conceal the truth, forge lies,
mislead people, and deceive them. So, ask the people who speak this
language if you are among those who doubt. (Author)
114
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
also mentioned in some of the scriptures of the Prophets of the
Children of Israel, and this is something that is accepted by the
Christians, so there is no need for me to mention this in detail.
From this point, it is proven that Jesus as did not die on the
cross, instead, Allah saved him from it and did not let him face
reproach. Then Jesus as migrated to locate and reunite the dispersed
tribes and peoples of the Children of Israel. He reached Kashmir
and settled in that land, where he remained until his death. He
was buried in Mohalla Khanyar alongside his loved ones. If it were
proven that to recognise graves, tombstones were scribed at the
time of the Messiah, peace be upon him, (I believe this to be the
case with correct knowledge) then logic would dictate that his
grave would also have these inscriptions. If examined, many evi-
dences and clear secrets would emerge. We pray to Allah to make
it so and to eliminate the last remnant of the disbelievers. I have
prepared a description of the tomb of the Messiahas, and whoso-
ever reads about this, it is as if he saw the tomb of Jesus as.
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
12
115
Shrine of a Prophet in Khanyar, Srinagar, Kashmir
Hole
13 × 13
31-6
Windows
W
along with another disciple
The Tomb of Jesus, peace be upon him,
Tomb of
Yuz Asaf Nabi
Windows
6
Platform
21
W
W.
Windows
door
Windows
door
15
0
سه سه
68
000
Tombs []
000 0
These are graves of other individuals
Graveyard
48
W
N
+
E
28
سه
17
1030
12
34
0 0
سه
000
Tombs
0 0 0 0 0
66
99
D
116
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
the
Thereafter, I list the names of trustworthy men from among
citizens of this town who testified, without doubt or suspicion,
that this was the grave of Jesus as Yüz Āsaf the Prophet of Allah,
and they are as follows:¹
[1]
Maulawi Wa'iz Rasool Ṣāḥib
Mir, Wā'iz Kashmir, son of
[9]
Mehr Abdul-Jabbar, Khan-
yar.
the late Muhammad Yahya
Ṣāḥib.
[2] Maulawi Ahmadullah Wā'iz,
brother of Wa'iz Rasool
Mir, Wa'iz Kashmir.
[3] Wā'iz Muhammad Sa'dud-
din Ateeq, may Allah forgive
him, brother of Mir Wa'iz.
[4] Azizullah Shah, Mohalla
Kāch Gari.
[5] Haji Nuruddin, Advocate,
'Urf 'Ïd Gāhi.
[6] Aziz Mir Numbardar, Qas-
bah Panpur, Dhaildār.
[7] Mehr Munshi Abdus-Sam-
ad, Public Prosecutor,
Resident Fateh Kadal.
[8] Mehr Ḥāji Ghulam Rasool,
Merchant, Resident Mohalla
Malak Purah, Zaina Kadal.
[10]
Mehr Ahmad Khan, Mer-
chant, Islamabad.
[11] Mehr Muhammad Sultan
Mir, Rajuori Kadal.
[12] Mammah Jiyo, Saraf Kadl.
[13] Hakeem Mahdi Ṣāḥib
Amamiyah, Resident Bagh-
banpura, District Sangeen
Darwaza.
[14] Hakeem Ja'far Ṣāḥib Amāmi-
yah, Same as above.
[15] Muhammad Azeem Ṣāḥib
Amamiyah, Same as above.
[16] Mirza Muhammad Beg Ṣāḥib
Contractor, Imamia, Resident
Mohalla Madinah Ṣāḥib.
1. These witnesses were thousands, but these names are sufficient, as
all of them are pillars of the people, their known and righteous ones.
(Author)
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
117
[17] Ahmad, Kalla Mandibal,
District Nowshera, Amām-
iyah.
[18] Hakim Ali Naqi Şāḥib
Amāmiyah.
[19] Hakim Abdur-Rahim Şāḥib
Amamiyah, Tehsildar.
[20] Maulawi Haidar Ali Ṣāḥib
son of Mustafa Ṣāḥib,
Amamiyah, Graduate of
Karbala Mu'allā, Mujtahid
Imami Sect.
[21] Mehr Mufti Maulawi Shari-
fuddin Şahib, son of the late
Maulawi Mufti Azizuddin.
[22] Mehr Mufti Maulawi Ziaud-
din Ṣāḥib.
[23] Maulawi Sadruddin, Ham-
adaniya School Teacher,
Imam of Wazah Pūrah
Mosque.
[24] Mehr Abdul-Ghani of Kai-
lashpur, Imam of a Mosque.
[25] Habibullah, Bookbinder,
Adjacent to the Central
Mosque.
[28] Habib Beg Numbardar, Fruit
Seller, Habba Kadal, Srina-
gar.
[29] Ahmad Jiyo, Zainah Kadal,
Kashmir.
[30] Mehri Ghulam Muhyuddin
Zargar, Mohalla Kachcha Bal
Qila, Khanyar.
[31] Abdullah Jiyo, Fruit Mer-
chant, State Owned Lands,
Srinagar.
[32] Muhammad Khizr, Resident
Ali Kadal, Srinagar.
[33] Abdul-Ghaffar son of Musa
Jiyo Hindu, Narwara.
[34] Mehr Abli Wani son of Sid-
diq Wani, Buta Kadal.
[35] Mehr Ghulam Nabi Shah
Husseini.
[36] Mehr Abdur-Raḥīm, Imam
of Kahanmo Mosque, Tehsil
Tral.
[26] Abdul-Khaliq, Khandi Pora, [37] Mehr Ahmad Shah, Srinagar.
Tehsil Hari Por.
[27] Mehri Abdullah Sheikh,
Mohalla Wadi Kadal, Aşl
Tarkah Wan Gāmī.
[38] Yousuf Shah, Narwara, Srina-
gar.
118
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
[39] Mehr Amīr Bābā, Mohalla
Gargari, Srinagar.
[40] Abdul-Ali Wā'iz, Chama
Dori, Srinagar.
[41] Mir Raj Muhammad, Kar-
nah Wazārat Pahār.
[42] Lisah Jiyo, Hafiz Tainki
Purah, Srinagar.
[43] Khizr Jiyo, Tār Frosh.
[44] Mehr Abdullah Jiyo, Eldest
son of Sahib-e-Darwesh,
Khwaja Bazaar.
[45] Muhammad Shah son of
Umar Shah, Mohalla Didi
Kadal.
[46] Nabah Shah, Imam of Gaw
Kadal Mosque.
[52] Mehr Pir Majeed Baba
Andarwadi.
[53] Isma'al Jiyo Doobi, Same as
above.
[54] Saifullah Shah, Servant of
Dargah Andarwadi.
[55] Qadir Doobi, Same as above.
[56] Mehr Maulawi Ghulam
Muhyuddin Kimoh, Tehsil
Haripur.
[57] Muhammad Siddiq, Shoe
Seller, Mohalla Shamswari.
[58] Muhammad Iskandar, Same
as above.
[59] Muhammad Umar, Same as
above.
[47] Mahdi Khaliq Shah, Servant [60] Lisa Butt, Same as above.
of Dargah Hadrat Sheikh
Nooruddin Noorani, Cha-
rar-i-Sharief.
[48] Ghulam Muhammad Ha-
keem, Adjacent to Mohalla
Dil Hasan.
[49] Abdul-Ghani, Naid Kadal.
[50] Mehr Qamaruddin, Shop-
keeper, Zainah Kadal.
[51] Mehr Majeed Shah Pir
Andarwadi.
[61] Maulawi Abdullah Shah,
Same as above.
[62] Ḥāji Muhammad, Kalal
Doori.
[63] Muhammad Ismail, Mir Mis-
ghar, Mohalla Daribal.
[64] Abdul-Qadir Kīmoh, Tehsil
Haripur.
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
119
[65] Ahmad Jiyo Chitgar, Mohal- [69] Muhammad Jiyo Mir, Mohal-
la Kalal Dori.
[66] Muhammad Jiyo Zargar son
of Rasool Jiyo, Fateh Kadal.
[67] Abdul-Aziz Misghar son
of Abdul-Ghani, Mohalla
Andarwari.
[68] Ahmad Jiyo Misghar son of
Ramadan Jiyo, Daribal.
la Daribal.
[70] Asad Jiyo Mir, Mohalla Zain-
ah Kadal.
[71] Pir Nuruddin Qureshi, Mo-
halla Batamaloo Sahib, Imam
of a Mosque.
[72] Mehr Ghulam Hasan son of
Nuruddin Marjanpuri, Safa
Kadal.
The author: Mirza Ghulam Ahmad of Qadian,
5 June 1902
120
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
When the death of Jesus as was proven and the necessity of a
Messiah breaking the cross was proven in this time, what do you
think, O youngsters? Will Allah destroy this Ummah at the hands
of the People of the Cross, or send a man to rejuvenate the religion
and protect its walls?
By Allah, I am that Promised Messiah, a bounty from
Allah, the Compassionate and the Most Loving. I am the fulfil-
ment of the prophecy of Fuşuşul-Hikam,' the guard during the
raids of thieves, and the shield of religion from the Gracious when
it is attacked.
Do you not ponder over the two chains: the chain of Moses as
and the chain of the Master of the Universe sas? You have affirmed
that Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, was
made at the beginning of the chain like Moses as. So why do you
not see at the end of the chain the likeness of Jesusas? You know
the necessity of the advent of someone from Allah, yet you ignore
it, while you see the corruptions of the time but turn a blind eye.
You watch what [afflictions] were poured on Islam and then you
sleep, and
you were called to be supporters of Islam, instead you
argue in favour of the Christians. Do you fight Allah to make
Him powerless?
Allah has full power over His decree, but you do not know.
Your appointed time has drawn near, so what is the matter with
you that you do not fear? Do you think that I have forged a lie
against Allah while you know the fate of people who forge lies
against Him? Indeed, the curse of Allah is upon those who forge
1. Fuṣūṣul-Hikam [The Seals of Wisdom] is a book written by Ibn Arabi
where he mentioned the signs of the Mahdi. [Publisher]
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
121
lies against Allah, and likewise, the curse of Allah is upon those
who deny the truth when it has come to them and turn away. Do
you not look at the time, or is it that on the hearts are the locks of
tyranny? Do you aspire to correct with your own hands what has
been corrupted in terms of deed and faith?
A blind person cannot guide another blind person, and the
Way of the Gracious [God] has passed. Know that the tranquil-
lity that purifies from sins, descends into the hearts, transports to
the abode of the Beloved, removes from darkness, and saves from
ignorance is not generated except through the intercession of peo-
ple sent from heaven by the Lord of Glory. This is how Allah's
practice has been established to reform people of desires.
Those masters will be rejected at the beginning and will be
harmed at the hands of the wretched. Things will be said about
them that harm them, such as slander, accusation, and falsehood.
Then power will be given back to them, and it will be placed in
their hearts that they should return to their Lord with supplica-
tion, invocation, and prayers. They will turn to Allah, praying for
victory, supplicating and invoking.
Then Allah will look at them as He does to His loved ones,
and they will be helped, so that every haughty enemy of truth,
transgressor, and doubter will be ruined. Allah will make the
end of the matter favourable for His friends who were laughed
at and reckoned weak. The matter will be decreed, their status
will be exalted, and a people who were spreading disorder will be
destroyed. Such indeed is the way of Allah with the people who
obey His command, do not slander, seek nothing but the Glory
and Majesty of Allah, and annihilate themselves [in Him].
122
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
Then Allah, who sees what is in their chests, will help them,
and they will not be abandoned. They are Allah's trustees on
earth, His mercy
from heaven, and the rain of grace upon man-
kind. They do not utter words except with the Holy Spirit, and
they do not speak except with wisdom and good exhortation.
They come with an antidote that is not available to anyone
among the people of logic or philosophy, nor in the words of the
so-called scholars who are deprived of spirituality, nor through
any of the rational tricks. Indeed, no one can be revived except
through the mediation of these living by the Hand of Allah, and
this is what the Way of Allah, the Lord of Majesty and Glory,
necessitated.
What Allah has locked cannot be opened except with these
keys, and His command is not revealed except through the medi-
ation of these chiefs. Earth has never been reformed or brought
forth except with the water of heaven, and water is the revelation
of Allah which descends through the prophets' clouds. This is suf-
ficient for you if you possess intelligence.
If you do not accept the truth and do not seek it, then seek
light from bats and fruits from grass. We have warned you in the
past and pointed to a servant whom Allah has chosen and selected
for this matter. No one can see him except those whom Allah has
guided and allowed to see. So, pray to Allah to open your eyes
to see the spring that made running for mankind. For people are
about to perish in the desert of misguidance, like Ishmaelªs when
he suffered from thirst in the foreign land. So, Allah had mercy
on them at the head of this century and caused a spring to flow for
the pious people, to quench their and their children's thirst and to
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
123
save them from ruin. Is there anyone among you who is asking for
purer water?
This is the last thing we said in this book to those who take
advice and lesson, and peace be upon those who follow guidance.
This treatise was composed as a conclusive argument in fulfil-
ment of the command of the Lord of Majesty, by the Promised
Messiah and Mahdi, the awaited Imam, supported by Allah,
the Self-subsisting-Mirza Ghulam Ahmad of Qadian, Punjab,
India, may Allah grant him victory and strength. It was completed
in the blessed month of Rabi'ul-Awwal in the year 1320 after the
Hijra of the Prophet (peace, prosperity, and pleasing blessings be
upon him).
NAMES OF PROPHETS
Quranic
Biblical
Quranic
with Diacritical
Equivalent
without
Marks
Diacritical Marks
Ādam
Adam
Adam
Ibrāhīm
Abraham
Ibrahim
Dāwūd
David
Dawud
Ilyās
Elijah
Ilyas
Al-Yasa'
Elisha
Al-Yasa
Ya'qūb
Jacob
Yaqub
'Isā
Jesus
Isa
Yusuf
Joseph
Yusuf
Muḥammad
Muhammad
Mūsā
Moses
Musa
Sulaiman
Solomon
Sulaiman
GLOSSARY
Abjad A numerological system that
assigns a specific numerical value
to each letter in the Arabic alpha-
bet. (Also known as Hisäbul-Ju-
mal.)
Amin Let it be so. Arabic equivalent
to amen.
Auliya' Literally means 'Friends' and
is the plural of wali, which is gen-
erally used to refer to a saintly per-
son. Shorter version of auliya'ul-
lāh.
Bai'at Oath of allegiance to a reli-
gious leader.
Dajjāl A term in Arabic that liter-
ally means, 'the great deceiver. In
Islamic terminology 'Dajjal' re-
fers to those satanic forces that
would be unleashed in the Latter
Days to oppose the Promised Mes-
siah as and al-Imām al-Mahdī. A
similar prophecy in the Christian
faith about the appearance of the
Antichrist refers to the same ap-
proach phenomenon, and we have
therefore used the terms ‘Dajjāľ
and 'Antichrist' and synonyms.
Furqan Literally, the 'Discrimina-
tion. Another name for the Holy
Quran, meaning the discrimina-
tion between right and wrong.
Hadith A saying of the Holy
Prophet Muhammadsa. The plural
is aḥādīth.
Hadrat A term of respect used to
show honour and reverence for a
person of established righteous-
ness and piety. The literal mean-
ing is: His/Her Holiness, Worship,
Eminence, etc.
Hijrah Migration. Refers to the ex-
odus from Makkah to Madinah by
the Holy Prophet Muhammadsas in
the
year 623 CE, which marks the
beginning of the lunar calendar of
Islam.
128
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
Holy Prophetas A title used exclu-
sively for the Founder of Islam,
Hadrat Muhammadsas.
Holy Quran The final and per-
fect Scripture revealed by Allah
for the guidance of mankind for
all times to come. It was revealed
word by word to the Holy Prophet
Muḥammad over a period of
twenty-three years.
sa
sas
Istighfar Seeking Allah's forgiveness.
Khātamun-Nabiyyin The Seal of
the Prophets. A title accorded by
God to the Holy Prophet Muḥam-
mads in the Holy Quran. A vari-
ant is Khātamul-Anbiya'
Maulawi A Muslim religious cleric.
Mi'raj The spiritual ascension of
the Holy Prophet Muhammad sas
to Heavens, described in the Holy
Quran and related in detail in ha-
dith literature.
contest between claimants to di-
vine
wherein each party
support
prays for God to curse the lying
party.
Muḥammad as Founder of Islam. see
Holy Prophets.
Ramadan The ninth month of the
lunar calendar, in which fasting is
prescribed for all adult, able-bod-
ied Muslims, except those trave-
ling, ill, pregnant, or nursing.
Ṣiḥāḥ Plural of Saḥiḥ, meaning 'au-
thentic'. Refers to Siḥāḥ Sittah,
six Hadith collections regarded as
among the most authentic.
Shariah Religious law of Islam. The
term is also used in the general
sense of any revealed law.
Shirk Associating partners with Al-
lah.
Surah A chapter of the Holy Quran.
Mubahalah Prayer duel. As de- Taqwa Righteousness. Fear of God.
scribed in Surah Al-e-Imran, a
 INDEX
Index of the Verses of the Holy Quran
Chapter 1, Surah al-Fatihah
verse 7
Chapter 8, Surah al-Anfal
verse 27
18.... صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ إِذْ أَنْتُمْ قَلِيلٌ مُّسْتَضْعَفُونَ فِي
الْأَرْضِ تَخَافُونَ أَنْ يَتَخَطَّفَكُمُ
Chapter 3, Surah Al-e-'Imrān
verse 145
النَّاسُ فَآوَاكُمْ
110
Chapter 11, Surah Had
106
verse 44
وَمَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ
قبله الرُّسُلُ
Chapter 4, Surah an-Nisa
verse 159
بَلْ زَفَعَهُ اللهُ إِلَيْهِ
Chapter 4, Surah an-Nisāl'
verse 159
بَلْ رَفَعَهُ اللهُ إِلَيْهِ
سَاوِي إِلَى جَبَلٍ يَعْصِمُنِي مِنَ
الماء
111
102
Chapter 15, Surah al-Hijr
verse 10
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ
لحَافِظُونَ
.103
verse 143
إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ
سُلطان
Chapter 5, Surah al-Ma'idah
verse
118
113 ,3105... فَلَمَّا تَوَفَّيْتَنِي
.65
.96
Chapter 17, Surah Bani Isra'il
verse 94
قُل سُبْحَانَ رَتِي هَلْ كُنْتُ إِلَّا بَشَرًا
رسُولاً
.105
Chapter 7, Surah al-'Arāf
verse 26
106..... فيهَا تَحْيَوْنَ وَفِيهَا تَمُوتُونَ
132
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
Chapter 23, Surah al-Mu'minun
verse 51
Chapter 93, Surah ad-Duha
verse 7
أَلَمْ يَجِدُكَ يَتِيمًا فَآوَى
وَجَعَلْنَا ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَأُمَّهُ آيَةً
و آوَيْنَاهُمَا إِلَى رَبْوَةٍ ذَاتِ قَرَارٍ
.110
وَمَعِينٍ
Chapter 77, Surah a-Mursalat
verses 25-26
ألمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ بِفَاتًا أَحْيَاء
وَأَمْوَاتًا
.105
.110
Index of Topics
Abul-Fath al-Iskandari 45
Abū Zayd al-Surūji 45, 84
al-Baqā'
station of, 38
Fuşūsul-Hikam 120
Gilgit 101
Government
raising sword against, is great
sin 48
Hāmān 62
Homs 101
al-Iwā'
granting refuge 110
al-Manār
editor of 5
Ibādi 97
Antichrist
Iblis
name of, not mentioned in
character of, 56
Quran 73
Idris
morals of, 56
Arabic
language of Allah 40
Arbiter
sent by your Lord 61
Avicenna 100
Canon of Medicine
by Avicenna 100
Christianity
'Ijāzul-Masih 5
'Isā Sahib
prophet who migrated to
Kashmir 100
Kashmir
resting palce of Jesus 49
Khilafah
concept of, 41
scholars of, 28
Dālīn
Christians were called, 101
Friends of Allah
not perish like liars 2
Furqan 12
display knowledge of, 53
Kings
state of Muslim, 24
Levant 5
scholars of, 4
Ludd
an abbreviation for Ludhiana
75
Gate of, 75
134
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
Ludhiana
town of, first place people
pledged allegiance 75
Magians 37
Mahdi
has come 49
will come with dignity and
tranquility 48
Marham-e-'Īsā 100
Messiah
came with finest knowledge
52
Mi'rāj
was a sublime vision 104
Ottoman Sultan 41
Pharaoh
characteristic of the days of, 7
one that vanquished, 62
Promised Messiah
By Allah I am, 120
Sahban 15
Seal of the Caliphs 3
Seal of the Prophets 3
Sheikhs
of this
age 81
Skardu 101
Sultan
Ottomon, 28
Torah
Mohalla Khanyar
Jesus buried at, 114
Mujāhids 71
Muqallids 97
Mutazilites 97
Nabi Sayyāḥ
traveling prophet 108
Night of Destiny 76
Ointment of Jesus 100
Ottoman Empire 5
one who is crucified is cursed
according to, 103
Two Holy Cities
scholars of, 5
Umar al-Fārūq 106
Wahhabi sect 97
Yemen
kings of, 15
Yüz Āsaf
meaning of name, 113
prince prophet from Children
of Israel 100
Zakāt 83
Zaqqūm 38
 Guidance
for
Perceiving Minds
12 June 1902
Price per copy
12 anna
Postage
I.S anna;
Value Payable
I anna
Printed at the Diyā'ul-Islām Press,
QADIAN, THE ABODE OF PEACE
Under the supervision of Ḥakim Faḍl-ud-Din of Bhera
Number of copies 700
Translation of the original Arabic title page for Al-Huda wat-Tabṣiratu Liman Yarā
بسمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
All praise be to Allah, Who disclosed a path to His saints—a
path where even the sand-grouse are led astray. He illuminated
for them a day so bright that even the bat cannot perceive it. He
guided them along trails untrodden by camels, and for their sake,
He made such springs gush forth that the birds of attainment
were unable to reach them.
May peace and blessings be upon the Seal of the Messengers $as,
whose seal of prophethood necessitated that people like the
prophets be sent from his Ummah; his trees continue to blos-
som and bear fruits until the end of time, and that his impact is
indelible, and his remembrance shall never cease. For this reason,
it is the practice of Allah to send forth chosen servants to reju-
venate this faith. He grants them the hidden knowledge of the
Quran, and leads them to absolute certainty, so that they can
reveal verities of the truth to all creation, along with its authority,
strength, and brilliance; and so they can explain the essence, paths
and signs of recognising these verities. They can safeguard people
from innovations and the deluge of evil deeds. They establish the
Shariah and spread it, while eradicating any form of extremity or
the remissness of following it.
1. In the Name of Allah, the Gracious, the Merciful. [Publisher]
2
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
If Allah intends to reform the faith of the people on earth,
enlighten their understanding, or aid them during times of hor-
rors, calamities, and afflictions, He appoints one of these servants
from
among them. He supports him with conclusive arguments
and miraculous signs, opening the hearts of the righteous to
accept him. Simultaneously, he descends His wrath on those who
lack fear. Some people will believe in him and testify to his truth,
while others will disbelieve, reject, and become an obstruction for
him, and cause harm to him. They stand as barriers, preventing
anyone from approaching him.
Hereupon, Allah's jealousy ignites, seeking to eradicate them
and shield His servant from their arrogance. He continues to
destroy the disbelievers and drive them away, until the earth
becomes purged of these vermin. Peace envelops these honoured
righteous souls, and the Islamic community celebrates these elite
who are like luminous stars piercing the darkness.
This phenomenon stands as one of the greatest signs of those
who come from the Lord of Glory and Power, and descend upon
humanity to draw them towards the Heavenly Kingdom and the
realm of divinity. Allah, through them, dispels darkness, testing
both the wicked and the good, revealing the victorious and the
unsuccessful alike. So that one soul will be jubilant, while another
wails in misery. Some are revived, while others are destroyed.
The one commissioned by Allah receives support on earth;
he is granted respite until the enemy's sword becomes blunt, the
darkness recedes, and the sun of guidance ascends.
In brief, the Friends of Allah will not perish like liars, nor
will their fate be like fabricators. Rather, they will be protected,
accepted, supported, and given preference over the worlds. They
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
will not be wasted or destroyed, and they will live before the eyes
of their Lord as victorious. They are Allah's proof on earth and
true mercy for the people of the earth. There is no misery in this
world like the rejection of those commissioned by Allah, nor hap-
piness like the acceptance of those who are accepted. They are the
key to the fortress of security and safety, and the guard of those
who enter [the religion]. So what would be the condition of the
one who lost this key, did not enter the fortress and sit with those
who are banished?
The most miserable people are two men. Their misery cannot
be reached by any human or jinn: a man who disbelieved in the
Seal of the Prophets sas, and another man who did not believe in
the Seal of the Caliphsas. He refused him, was arrogant, treated
him poorly, abandoned the path of modesty, and did not show
respect to Allah and His promised one and reached the pinnacle
of disrespect. If he had not been born, it would have been better
for him than a bad outcome and discontent of the Lord of Majesty.
He will surely taste from the cup of cursing, insult, and contempt.
The hour is coming, of which there is no doubt. However, those
whose hearts are sealed will not desist. When it is said to them,
"Believe, reform, and do not corrupt," they will say, “Rather, you
are the ones who create disorder." They consider wrongdoing to
be goodness, and corruption to be righteousness, so they will not
refrain. But what if their souls have departed and what they were
concealing was revealed? And when it is said to them, "Did the
head of the century not come?" They reply in the affirmative. So,
"Will you not then be God-fearing?"
say,
The similitude of believers and disbelievers is like the living
4
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
and the dead. Are the two similar? Indeed, there is glad tiding for
those who prosper.
And they said, "You are not a Messenger." In fact, they rejected
that which was beyond their understanding. However, they will
soon come to realise the truth. Those who testified to the truth
are the ones that will be supported—no darkness or shame will
shroud their faces, and fear will not haunt them. As for those who
disbelieved, neither the solar and lunar eclipses, nor any other
sign, brought them benefit. Instead, they persistently mock [the
truth].
Indeed, they understand the knowledge bestowed by Allah,
yet they are niggardly. The path of guidance stretches out before
them, yet they wander astray. They are swept by the night of fanat-
icism and are trapped within it day and night. They witness the
signs of Allah with their eyes, yet they choose to deny. I was not
alone in this [struggle]. Rather, no Messenger came to the people
except that they mocked him to the extent that you are now wit-
nessing it yourself.
For a considerable period, I have witnessed the injustice
perpetuated by the malevolent individuals of this land. I have
observed their penchant for denial and contemptuous behaviour,
experiencing first-hand their hearts encased in armour of hostility
and rejection, their very essence defined by denial and accusation.
When I despaired of them, my heart turned towards other
countries that perhaps I may find helpers or discover a more pious
heart among them. At that moment, I remembered the scholars
of the Levant and the honourable people there. I intended to
reach out to them to establish evidence [of my call], hoping for
a truthful and faithful response, and so that they could take the
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
truth from the abyss and place it in the heights. However, I was
informed that debates there are forbidden, and laws are in place
to prevent them. Consequently, I assumed that what was meant
was to come from the land of Egypt and its people, who were con-
templative, rich in knowledge, and fruitful. I believed that among
them were individuals regarded as researchers and eloquent writ-
ers, presuming they belonged to the contemplative group, rather
than the hasty and unjust.
This assumption led me to send my book I'jāzul-Masiḥ to
the editor of al-Manar and his friends, hoping that they would
extol its merits and give it the recognition it deserves. I chose
to prioritise them over the scholars of the Two Holy Cities, the
Levant, and the Ottoman Empire, hoping they would help me
to unravel the complexities of thought and alleviate the concerns
that burdened me. I sought their assistance in extinguishing the
harm that was inflicted upon me, and I hoped they would help me
in righteousness and piety. However, upon the book's arrival to
the proprietor of al-Manar, along with other letters that needed
responses, he failed to appreciate its value or benefit from its
extraordinary vast knowledge. Instead, he chose to use his pen
to wound and harm me, displaying traits of envious and arrogant
people. He relentlessly began to harm and belittle me, showing
no inclination towards respect, a trait befitting honourable indi-
viduals. His intention was to cause me pain and tarnish my rep-
utation in the eyes of the common people who are like cattle.
In doing so, he descended from the heights of an impenetrable
lighthouse straight into countless pains. He trampled over me like
pebbles, and after the flames of mischief had been extinguished,
he rekindled them. He said, what he had to say, yet like those who
6
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
possess sound judgment, did not contemplate; he inclined to the
earth and did not elevate himself like the righteous. He fell after
behaving arrogantly, and such a descent holds great significance,
especially when it is from the Manār [the lighthouse]. Indeed,
he exchanged guidance for error. He thinks he has reached the
heights of proficiency; he should know that he will be defeated
and will never be seen. This tiding is from Allah who knows what
is hidden and concealed. God is with people who fear Him and
do good. He supports them in battlefields, so their word reigns
supreme. All languages belong to Allah, and He gives a portion
of them to whomever He wishes and decrees. His distinguished
servants speak through His Spirit, and no one else is given this
guidance. Every light descends from heaven, so O fools! What is
your hand? Are you arrogant because of your language? While
wind blew over it? Today, you are nothing more than a
non-Arab, so do not be proud of your past. You have changed
your language completely, so how can you claim to be of a higher
position? Do you forget your conversations or are you deceiving
the fools? The Messenger of Allah and the Chief of the People sas
did not declare your land as part of Arabia, so do not forge lies
against Allah and His Messengersas, for he who forges a lie shall
perish. So, O boastful one, enough of this and move along. Peace
be upon whoever follows guidance.
in
a strong
you,
I had hoped to find support in but instead, you began
using hurtful words to humiliate and disgrace me. I had expected
to receive words of belief and respect from you, yet, you attributed
flaws in me; I had thought that your land was the safest as a refuge,
but you wounded me like the one who strikes and punches. This
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
7
reminded me of the fights, brawls, and brutality that were charac-
teristic of the days of Pharaoh.
support of
host
I express this not as one filled with regret, for superiority
belongs to the one who took the initiative. I had hoped that your
friendship would ease my anxiety and the
of your
would alleviate my grief. Unfortunately, my expectations were
misplaced, and my intuition proved wrong. Instead of your com-
forting presence, I felt the opposite. This serves as an illustration
of some of your qualities, and from it, I have learned that this
land is one from which the flames of pride and arrogance do not
subside, continuing to rage to this day. May Allah have mercy on
Moses as; why did he depart without its destruction?
my
book of being
The crux of the matter is that accused
you
riddled with omissions and errors yet failed to provide any evi-
dence from grammarians or writers. Thus, I turn to Allah to
lament this injustice and slander on your part, for you have shown
baseless animosity and resentment towards me. Have you made
the language with which you communicate with your daughters
and wives the standard of correctness?
Without even perusing my book, you attributed mistakes
to its vocabulary, composition, styles, and methods. You have
incurred the displeasure of [God] the Reckoner and showed no
fear of His punishment. You attributed to others falsehood and
error. You corrupted people succumbing to the insidious whis-
pers of Satan. You claimed that the book is rife with reprehensible
mistakes, alleging affectation and weakness in its rhyme, lacking
in ornate words and wit, and has the deficiency of non-Arab for-
eigners. I believed you to be a beloved that grants me tranquillity
like the morning breeze. Instead, you emerged as an adversary
8
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
wielding weapons. I expected your voice to be soothing, like the
gentle coo of a dove, but instead, you revealed a repugnant visage
akin to poison.
I was taken aback by your abrupt harshness and severity,
without any prior investigation. I felt like the disorientated and
confused lost traveller. Yet, I chose to keep the matter to myself,
rationalising that perhaps it was merely an oversight in editing,
and you did not intend to demean or insult me, after all, how
can one commit such profound evil that cannot be excused, and
how can a person of virtue like yourself utter unseemly speech in
public? However, upon confirmation that the source was indeed
you, I took up my weapons for Jihad, declaring, "In your stead, O
obstinate one," realising I must personally remove these thorns.
I knew that you did not speak these words out of anything
but envy, lacking in factual basis. Therefore, I anticipated your
intentions, aiming to thwart any belief in your envy. Scholars in
our lands often seize upon any cunning situation to disparage me.
Therefore, all that you have said will likely provoke and embolden
them to scorn me. If it were not for the fear of their mischief, I
would have remained silent, enduring patiently, and showing
tolerance in this matter. However, now I am concerned for the
people and apprehensive of the insidious whispers of deceit.
Indeed, some testimonies are sharper than swords, and I fear that
the flames of discord will be reignited by the words of al-Manar,
and that its mīm letter [the sounds of m] will fall, and what will
remain is Nār [fire].
We have defeated the enemy and concluded the war. In our
archery competition, we had the upper hand; every participant
exerted effort until all arrows were released from their quivers.
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
All disputes came to an end; those that were engaged in debate
calmed down, disputes ceased, and Allah brought defeat upon
anyone who confronted me, destroying those who wrangled with
me. Now, the wicked have been revived after death, and al-Manar
has bolstered them with false statements. I observe them grow-
ing arrogant and resuming their conflict; they seek to deceive the
ignorant through combat. They have returned to their evil and
intensified their opposition due to the monstrous action and per-
verse pursuit of al-Manar. A faction of blind individuals perceives
its words as significant. Where are the great literary minds like
those of the past?
Instead, they blindly follow whatever they hear from the envi-
ous and corrupt, lacking the ability to appreciate refined expres-
sions or the desire to grasp the beauty of language. They are unfa-
miliar with the subtleties of rhyme and adorned speech. They
claim to be scholars, yet they fail to understand the essence of
true knowledge and artistry. There was no need for me to recount
this tale or to express my anguish. The editor of al-Manar is not
alone from among those who disdain and insult others. In fact,
all opponents are accustomed to enmity so they can turn people
away from the path of the rightly guided and include them with
the transgressors. Many such individuals can be found in these
lands, recognisable by the darkness veiling their faces, a result of
their obstinate defiance.
They mention me in the same manner as he did, and they dis-
dain me just as he did. However, I pay no heed to them or their
words. I turn away from them, saying that they are ignorant peo-
ple. They are screaming due to the lethal strike on the back of their
heads. What good can be expected from them when they persist in
IO
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
their misguidance? Yet, I noticed that the proprietor of al-Manar
was revered in the eyes of these malevolent individuals, and his
testimony was highly esteemed by some of the fire bearers. They
would mention it fervently, both day and night. Their whispers
reached me, I uncovered their secrets, and discerned their plots. I
was informed that they ridiculed me, and their scorn grew daily.
When I saw that they were deceived by the luminaries of the
seabed and the pebbles of the land, and had increased in stub-
bornness and corruption, I feared that their putridity would
spread over this country. I observed as they looked at me distrust-
fully, clapping their hands, toying with me and bothering me for
the sake of humour. They made the words of al-Manar a ploy for
ignorance, transgression, and contempt. I prepared myself like
someone devoted to Jihad; one who strikes an axe in the head of
that throws stone.
the enemy
By [God] the One whose mercy preceded His wrath, and
Whose compassion escaped His Poignancy, I initially harboured
good thoughts toward the proprietor of al-Manar. I believed
that he spoke with utility in mind rather than intending harm.
However, it became evident to me that he did not exercise restraint
in his speech as expected of honourable individuals of good
nature. He persisted in demeaning me in his newspaper, leading
envious individuals to eagerly consume his words like one eating
something delicious. They seized upon his words, reigniting their
animosity after it had waned, a characteristic of the foolish. They
treated his words as sharp weapons, publishing them in Indian
newspapers. They wrote everything that was extremely difficult
for innocent people to hear, causing harm to my heart, in accord-
ance with the behaviour of the vile, the foolish, and the most
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
II
despicable enemies. They walked haughtily, displaying arrogance
and pride, as though adorned with embroidered robes, and as if
cities had opened their gates for them, or as though their dead had
been resurrected. I perceived their mischiefs to be as damaging to
the public as falsehoods, regarding these assertions as irrefutable
evidence, sufficient to deceive some ignorant individuals and lead
the simple-minded into error.
Thus, I viewed refuting them as a righteous duty, an obligation
that could not be shirked without its fulfilment, and a debt owed
that must be repaid in full. Dispelling public misconceptions is
imperative in the current era and a responsibility of the Imam.
So, I turned my face to the heavens and beseeched Allah's help
through earnest and fervent supplications, asking to be guided
to the path of conclusive argument, establishing truth, nullifying
falsehood, and elucidating the right path. It was instilled in my
heart that I should write a book for this purpose and challenge
this editor, along with everyone else who stubbornly opposed me
from that country, to produce a book of equal calibre.
I turned to Allah with utmost eagerness, dedicating myself to
ardent supplication and prayer, until signs
signs 
of a response became
evident, uncertainty lifted, and I was given strength in writing that
book. Once published and the chapters completed, I will send it
to him. If he provides a good response and an excellent rebuttal,
I will burn my books, kiss his feet, seek his assistance, and align
myself with his standards in measuring people. And here, I swear
by the Lord of Creation, reaffirming the covenant of this oath.
Indeed, injuring noble individuals with words is more severe
than piercing them with arrows. It is even more grievous than
12
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
slaying them with blade and sword. The wounds inflicted by
a blade can heal, but the wounds caused by words cannot be
mended.
As for his claim of knowledge and eloquence, as is intuitively
understood from his words, it is merely his assertion, and we can-
not accept it without first establishing his eminence. I doubt that
al-Manar will produce a work of knowledge comparable to my
book or exhibit a brilliance akin to the brightness of my sheath.
Despite this, I sometimes think to myself that it is possible the
editor of al-Manar was free from these objections, and it is possi-
ble he did not intend to disdain or gore like horned animals, but
rather aimed to safeguard the word of Allah from the ignominy
of opposition."
Actions are judged by intentions. If this is the truth, then
there is no doubt he has earned many degrees for himself with
these articles, for love of the word of Allah will grant him entry
to Paradise and protect him like a shield. What sin is upon the
one who insulted me to protect the Furqan, not to disparage or
demean, and took the path of supporting the religion, not the
flame of insult and belittlement! Is he not among the defenders of
Islam and those advocating for the glory of the word of Allah the
All-Knowing, who is the Master of all Speech?
Allah knows the secrets and what is even more concealed, and
1. I think he was upset by the ban of Jihad, the cessation of war and sharp
swords. This is the time to display signs, not the era of drawing swords.
The only weapon now is the blade of arguments and clear proofs. It is
undeniable that waging war to promote religion in these times is among
the most egregious forms of ignorance. It is evident to those with rea-
son that there is no compulsion in religion. (Author)
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
13
every individual will receive according to their intentions. But I
am excused like him, for the mischiefs have spread from his words
and newspaper, thus I had to roll up my sleeves to seek retribu-
tion, with no other choice than to unveil what he concealed. Allah
knows the truth of his intention and the essence of his absolution
and piety. If he intended goodness in his words, then he will apol-
ogise and refrain from further conflict. However, if his intention
was to belittle and disdain, then Allah will judge between him
and me, and whoever is unjust will perish. I will send a book to the
editor of al-Manar for his due consideration. Then he will either
respond with anger or an apology. [This book] will serve as a cri-
terion for revealing the truth. If [the editor of] al-Manar repents
from his offense and acknowledges his mistake, then we should
not blame it for its fault. But if he fails to carefully examine the
significance of his opponent and fails to recognise the discrepancy
between my fine attire and his worn-out clothes, then he must
write a book similar to mine, following the same pattern. In doing
so, Allah will judge between us after secrets have been spread forth
and news disseminated.
I pray that Allah will send individuals with insight, and the
noble people of this land, to adjudicate with truth between me
and the one who parades as a "lighthouse." May they carefully
ponder over my words and his words with profound insight, dis-
cerning the essence of the discourse and distinguishing between
light and darkness.
I acknowledge that some newspaper writers possess a
possess a 
degree
of eloquence and are endowed with a knack for using persuasive
language. However, their talents are not employed for the pur-
pose of promoting the word of Allah. Instead, they seek personal
14
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
gain and favour, resorting to deceit and impertinence. We do not
deny their cunning ways and their tendency to distort the truth
in pursuit of material gain, whether through flattery or disdain,
all to escape financial constraints. Their language undoubtedly
derives from satanic influence, not from divine dignity, and is
motivated by the pursuit of wealth and possession, not by mirac-
ulous wonder.
My eloquence serves to remove the rust from minds and illu-
minate the path of truth through the light of evidence. I only
speak under the guidance of the Most Gracious. How can some-
one whose gaze is fixated solely on the material world, is wholly
inclined towards its pleasures, and is content with its adornments
like women, dare to challenge me? Do they claim mastery over
the [Arabic] language? They shall soon be defeated and retreat in
disgrace from the battlefield.
Their likeness is like that of a lame person who wishes to
attain the level of the strong. He takes one step forward and
then falls on his shoulder. Or they are like a lone pedestrian who
walks during a long night, whose blemishes are full, its darkness
intensifies, and its insects multiply as he wanders from one valley
to another, having no lamp with him, nor does he hear the voice
of a guide. No companion accompanied him, nor did he have
any provisions. He did not find a guard, nor did he see a herald,
nor a shining lamp. And then there is another man who wishes
to travel with the pedestrians and horse riders, so he mounted a
horse like a gazelle, and left the town when the rays of the sun
shone, with a company like a halo, saving him from losing his
way. Are they alike in the eyes of those endowed with reason?
This is a lesson for those who fear.
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
15
So, this is the truth and I tell you truly, the people of Allah are
provided with provisions from the Lord of His servants, and they
are directed to the correct path. All the necessities of guidance are
provided for them. They are given all the necessary supplies and
are sufficiently equipped to rise high. Thus, it is not for the people
of this world to compete with them and have hearts like theirs,
even if they ran actively like horses. How could it be if their hearts
are scattered like the spread of locusts, and their tongues are on
the plateau, and their souls are in valleys?
They say, "We are Arabs, nurtured by the milk of literature
from our mothers, and endowed with the power of speech akin
to the kings of Yemen, who, when they said something, it had
to be followed." They were arrogant with their proud souls and
Arabic tongues. They claimed the most invulnerable place for
themselves and boasted they could blunt the edge of every sword.
Yet, out of ignorance, they failed to realise that the saints of the
Most Gracious are granted gifts of knowledge and eloquence
beyond those bestowed upon the people of language. No one can
reach their proficiency even with great struggle and time. How
can they claim a share in this matter, even if they were granted
the eloquence of Saḥban'? For they have not polished the mirror
of faith, nor tasted from the divine fountain of knowledge. Thus,
they have merged folly with deprivation, and are unable to return
to the Most Gracious. Instead, their newspapers have become dry
and foul, preserved as if they were obligatory prayers. They cir-
culate newspapers seeking gifts and material possessions, save for
1. The name of a man from the Wä'il tribe who was set as an example for
eloquence. [Publisher]
16
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
a few righteous individuals. Most of them are fluttering through
their selfish desires. Their wings are clipped, unable to soar into
the skies. They traverse in darkness; you see them restless for the
world. Their pens scream for the hospitality of this world. They
seek a female-camel during its lactation, brimming with milk and
devoid of harm. They try to hunt on the coast, carrying traps on
their shoulders; they roam forests, barren lands, the wilderness,
and the deserts, yet you do not see any of them contented unless
they have obtained material gains. So, they spend their entire
night in these imaginations, and their entire day composing such
phrases.
What relation do they have with the spiritual and divine serv-
ants of Allah who are granted the sweetness and fluency of the
tongue; their hearts are given insight and their eyes are endowed
with divine light; they receive from their Lord two shares and two
booties [of this world and the hereafter]. They are a people who
have dismounted from the conveyance of their worldly desires
and landed in the realm of self-annihilation. Their intentions are
clear, and their negligence is minimal. They do not encounter a
path in the way of Allah but that they follow it, nor a wall but
that they scale it, nor a valley but that they traverse it, nor a guide
but that they inquire from him. They are the lovers of the Most
Gracious, intoxicated in His path. Who can disturb their peace
or match their characteristics? Whoever comes against them as
an opponent will be trampled like a plant beneath the hooves
of an animal. They seek God in times of trouble, shedding more
tears than the one who has no living child. Their likeness is akin
to a tree with sturdy branches and leafy limbs, abundant with the
fruits of Paradise. Whoever approaches it shall be blessed with
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
17
fresh ripe dates falling upon them. How fortunate are the hungry!
They are a people who have purified their souls and body shed-
ding their carnal desires and forsaking their nests. They showed
mercy to those that wronged them. They extinguished the fire of
their souls and perfected their lights.
As for the worldly people, they resemble a day with extreme
cold weather full of darkness and gloomy clouds. You find them
stripped of the robes of piety, visibly exposed by the prevalence
of indecency. They clad themselves with clothes of arrogance and
wrap themselves in the cloak of vanity and pride. How can they
then expect support
from the Lord of the Worlds? Rather, behind
them lies a stomach that endlessly craves, never satisfied, lead them
to Satan. They weep, having been ravaged by poverty and depriva-
tion of comfort, bearing only the burden of injustice and austerity,
devoid of any semblance of solace. Then they proclaim themselves
as chiefs of literature and guardians of the Arab language. Nay!
Rather, their winds have stagnated, their lamps have faded, their
land lies barren, and their prosperity and blessings dwindled away.
The majesty of their status will not be restored until they return to
God. He will not change their condition until they change their
intentions. Even if all of humanity that is on earth stand by their
side, they would not be able to frustrate the Messengers, even if
they brought forth the first and the last, except for the righteous.
Do they not reflect on those who passed away before them? Did
they emerge victorious over the Messengers of Allah, or were they
defeated?
Surely know! All pens belong to Allah, and this is one of the
miracles of the illuminating Book. Then, those who are close to
God will receive [the pens] proportionately to their obedience of
18
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
the Best of Messengers as. For those that display signs require mir-
acles so that their effect will remain until the Day of Judgment.
Those who are the inheritors of their Prophet will be granted
some of his blessings in a form of a reflection manner. If this were
not the case, then the munificence of prophethood would have
been nullified. They are like a trace of an old spring and like the
visible reflection of an image in a mirror. They have coloured their
eyes with the kohl of annihilation and have departed from the
courtyard of hypocrisy, so nothing of themselves remains, and
the image of the Seal of the Prophets as appears. All the extraordi-
nary actions and similar sayings to the pure Scriptures you find in
them, are not from them, but are a reflective garb of our Master,
the Best of Creation sas. If you are in doubt about the status of the
Friends of the Most Gracious, then carefully read the verse,
1
صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ
Are you surprised and not thankful? You see your selves in the
mirrors and yet you do not reflect?
Beware! The curse of Allah is upon those who claim, “We can
bring something like the Quran." The Quran is a miracle the likes
of no man or jinn can produce. It is a collection of divine verities
and virtues that no human science can encompass. In fact, it is a
revelation like no other, even if after there is another revelation
from the Most Gracious. Allah has [various] manifestations in
delivering His revelation; He did not manifest Himself before or
after, like He manifested on the Seal of His Prophets $as
1. The path of those on whom Thou hast bestowed Thy blessings (Surah
al-Fātiḥah, 1:7). [Publisher]
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
19
The status of the revelation of the saints is not the same as
that of the revelation of the Furqan. Even if a word was revealed
to them like the words of the Quran. Hence, the circle of Quranic
verities is the largest. It encompasses all sciences and collects
within itself all types of hidden truths. Its subtleties are deeply
profound and it precedes everything with clarification and proof,
increasing our cognisance of the divine. It is the wondrous Word
of Allah, the likes of which the ears have not heard, and the speech
of jinn and man cannot reach its eminence. The similitude of the
Quran and anything other than it is like a vision seen by a just and
high-minded king who is intellectual and wise. This same vision
was seen by a common man of low intellect and low-spiritedness.
There is no doubt that the king's vision and this man's vision, even
if they are the same and apparently not distinct, are not the same
for the prudent and expert interpreter of dreams. Rather, the
vision of the just king has a higher, more general, and more ben-
eficial interpretation. His dream is a source of goodness for the
masses and is more correct and clearer. As for the vision of a man
who is from among the common people, in most cases, the dream
is not free from ambiguity nor blemish. Furthermore, its impact
will not surpass his children, parents, or a group of his loved ones.
As for the contender, even if they begin to ride, they soon
setup camp in a nearby land and move from their mounts and
enter their nests. As for the horses of the Furqan, they roam the
entire circle of verities. It is a Book under which the seas of knowl-
edge flow, and no bird of explanation can fly above it. No one
can speak without borrowing from its treasures and taking out
of its gems. I see every speaker is empty-handed without burden-
ing himself with this debt. Every debtor rushes in litigation and
20
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
resorts to the judge. As for the Quran, it gives alms to the destitute
and removes burdens. Rather, it gives the bullion of salvation to
the sincere and does not bestow favours upon the debtors when
giving them respite. Instead, it encourages them to keep its pure
gold for themselves, and it does not arrest a thief, even if he took
things away.
Indeed, we are the disciples of the Furqan; we were filled to
the brim from its sea after we were like empty cups. If the editor
of al-Manar belittled me for this excuse, then I pray to Allah the
Jealous and Forgiving, for his zeal. If I were in his place, I would
say something similar to what he said. May the curse of Allah be
upon whoever denies the miracle of the Quran, the jewel of its
sword, the uniqueness of its word and the art of its composition.
By Allah, we drink from its spring and embellish ourselves with
its adornment. This is the reason why light and purity flow from
our speech, and our discourses shine with brilliance and radi-
ance, blessing and healing, eloquence and splendour. I do not
owe favour to anyone other than the Furqan; it raised me with
an upbringing that even parents cannot offer. Allah granted me a
drink from its fountain. I found it to be luminous and helpful,
much so that I did not feel any thirst or heat [after it], and I drank
from a cup, tempered with camphor.
These words of mine are not from my weak pen; rather, they
are words that have manifested with the help of the Wise and All-
Knowing God, through the blessings of the compassionate and
1. I mean whoever quotes a verse from the Quran with good inten-
tion, fearing Allah, there is no sin on him with God, the Knower of
Intentions, the Generous and the Gracious. (Author)
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
21
merciful Prophetas. Therefore, do not deny them in pursuit of
your livelihood, but rather ponder upon them like the one who
is righteous and wise. Or did you think that Allah does not know
what you know? Or that He is incapable of what you are capable
of? Not at all! Rather, you do not recognise Him as He ought to
be recognised, and you are arrogant. Allah grants an abundance
of knowledge to whomever He wills. So then why do you not
reflect? You were on the brink of a pit, but Allah showed mercy to
you. Will you then not be grateful?
WHAT IS WRONG WITH THE MUSLIMS
& What is the Treatment for this Time?
Corruption has emerged among Muslims, and groups of righteous
people have become as rare as red rubies. You do not see in them
the morals of Islam nor the compassion of honourable individu-
als. They persist in wickedness with even those that are related to
them. They offer boiling water to people, even if they were close
friends. They do not give a tenth [to those in need], even if they
are brothers or family members. They lack sincerity towards their
friends and brothers. They diminish the abundance of those who
console and fail to do good to those who do good. They deprive
people of endowments, even if they are acquaintances. They
are stingy with their resources, even towards their companions.
Indeed, if you look steadily at them and observe their faces repeat-
edly, you will find that most of the sects within this religion have
donned the garments of immorality, forsaking faith and chastity.
Here, we recount some conditions of the rulers of our time and
other individuals driven by their desires. Thereafter, we will eluci-
date what Allah desires in order to repel these evils and what has
been decreed for the reformation of Islam and Muslims.
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
24
The Current State of the Muslim Kings
Know, may Allah have mercy on you, that most of the kings, rul-
ers, and those in authority, who are considered stalwarts of this
nation, have inclined wholly towards the adornments of the world
with extreme enthusiasm. They have become accustomed to all
manner of luxuries and earthly possessions. Their pursuits are
nothing more than indulging in wine, music, and carnal desires.
They spend lavishly on satisfying transient pleasures, openly
drinking wine by the banks of cold rivers, amidst flowing waters,
towering trees, ripe fruits, and radiant flowers, reclining on lav-
ish carpets, oblivious to what is going on with their subjects and
nation. They lack knowledge of political law and managing peo-
ple's interests. They have not been equipped with the ability to
take control of situations, nor with reasoning or logic. Moreover,
those who are chosen to discipline them during their youth often
encourage them to indulge in wine, music, and drinking parties
in elevated lands, particularly during rainy weather and when the
gentle breeze is blowing. Similarly, they approach the unlawful
things of Allah and do not shun them. They do not fulfil the duties
of guardianship and do not adopt righteousness. For this reason,
they experience defeat after defeat. You witness their decline and
diminishing every day; they have incurred the displeasure of the
Lord of Heaven, as a duty was entrusted to them, yet they did not
carry it out with justice.
Do you claim that they are the caliphs of Islam? Nay! Rather
they were inclined to the earth, so how can they have any share
of complete piety? Therefore, they are defeated by everyone who
rises to oppose them, and they turn their backs despite the large
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
25
number of their soldiers, state, and power. This is nothing but
the effect of the wrath that descended upon them from heaven
because they gave preference to their carnal desires over the Lord
of Majesty, and because they placed insignificant worldly interests
above Allah, and were very voracious in its mortal pleasures and
entertainments. Furthermore, they were captives in the obnox-
iousness of pride, arrogance, and hypocrisy. They are lazy in reli-
gion and active in the paths of desires. How can greatness and
noble qualities be given to a contemptible man? How can virtue
and rank be granted to one of little value? They felt at ease with
lust, forgot their subjects and their religion, and did not fulfil the
right of responsibility and stewardship.
like
They consider the public treasury to be the reserves and reve-
nue that they inherited from their fathers, and they do not spend
money on the objects for which it should be spent, as per
the con-
dition of piety. They think that they will never be questioned and
will not be returned to Allah. The time of their state passes
confused dreams and shades of darkness. If you come to know of
their actions, your skins would creep, and you would be puzzled.
So, think: Are these people establishing faith and standing up for
it like helpers? Do they guide the lost and treat the blind? Nay,
rather, they have other objectives that they work for morning and
evening. They have no part in the Shariah. Rather, they want to
escape from its shackles and live in freedom. How can they ever
possess the strong determination like the truthful caliphs, and a
heart full of truth and justice like that of the righteous and pious
people?
Today, the thrones of the Caliphate are devoid of these quali-
ties, and bodies have been cast upon them that are soulless; in fact,
26
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
they are more worthless than the dead. Their presence is the great-
est calamity for Islam, and their era is the most unfortunate era
for religion. They eat and enjoy themselves, but do not pay heed
to the corruption nor feel grief. They do not see that the progress
of religion has stagnated, its lamps have faded, its Messenger as has
been rejected, and its truths have been declared wronged. You find
most of them persisting in what is forbidden, daring to promote
lustful and unlawful things, hastening to sins, turning to young
women, songs, and all types of ignorance. In the morning, they
lead luxurious lives, and in the evening, they indulge in all kinds
of pleasures. With such heinous and disobedient acts, how can
they expect to be supported by God?
In fact, the primary reason for Allah's wrath upon the Muslims
is the presence of negligent and luxurious sultans, who inclined to
the earth like worms, failing to provide for the servants of Allah
as they should, and becoming like the lame leg unable to run as
a proficient one does. Consequently, the assistance of heaven
has departed from them, and these infidels show no fear, unlike
the hallmark of pious kings who flee from the disbelievers like
donkeys fleeing from a lion. In battle, it only takes two of them
to defeat a thousand. What is the reason for this cowardice and
retreat, except a life of luxury and affluence like the wicked? With
this sin and treachery, how can they be supported with [divine]
help and aid? Allah does not change His continuous law, and
among His laws is that He supports the disbelievers, but does
not aid the wicked. Hence, you see the Christian monarchs being
supported and helped, taking control of their borders, possessing
lands, and advancing from every height. Allah did not help them
out of His mercy upon them, but rather He helped them because
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
27
of His wrath against the Muslims, if only they knew. How did
their enemies prevail over them if they were pious? In fact, when
they abandoned prayer and worship, their Lord stopped caring
for them, so they were punished for what they had done. Surely,
the worst of beasts are those who transgressed after they have
believed, they do evil and do not fear.
Then, because they broke the covenant of Allah and vio-
lated the limits of the Furqān, the misfortunes of time overtook
them, and they lost control of many countries. Their heedlessness
turned them away from their rights, and the tents of the People
of the Cross were set up in their lands, as an exemplary punish-
ment from Allah and a seizure from [God] the One that com-
pensates. They duelled with Allah by committing sin, and turned
their backs in flight from the infidels. It is not their enemies who
disgraced them, but it is Allah, for they disobeyed before His eyes,
so He showed them what He showed, left them in calamities, and
did not save them.
Their ministers are fraudulent people who devour their prop-
erty and are insincere. They do not prevent them from turning
a blind eye and acting immaturely like children. They overlook
them as a clever person playing the fool, and they defend them like
a hypocrite showing favouritism. They are of two types: a group
like scorpions and a group like women, or in other words we can
say: a group like inexperienced ignorant who have not been given
a share of knowledge, and a group like someone deliberately act-
ing like a fool, wishing only for the destruction of their kings, like
Satan.
They see their sultans approaching the sacred and unlawful
things of Allah and the Shariah, then they spread that they are
28
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
permissible and not contrary to the path of piety. They embellish
something that is the ugliest of sins in their eyes, and they want
to make them seem like animals or even inanimate objects. No
word comes out of their mouths that is close to truth and cor-
rectness, and they seek nothing within themselves but destruction
and ruin. They do not discuss with their kings what is best for
them in this world and the hereafter. Instead, they leave them like
predatory lions and snakes, and at all times they try their utmost
for them not to hear the commands of Allah and the practices of
the Best of Creation sas. They do not alarm them with the conse-
quences of negligence, nor do they blame them for committing a
sin. Hence, those possessing these characteristics are merely a hole
in the path of their kings' weak legs; or they are fuel for a fire, or a
covering for the eyes. They do not quench their thirst, but rather
praise their shortcomings. For this reason, their kings became the
target of people's abuse,
In Western newspapers, these individuals were labelled as lazy.
In fact, scholars of Christianity, observing these circumstances,
unanimously predicted that their days were numbered, and their
government and kingdom would swiftly vanish. For instance, if
the Ottoman Sultan were to pass away, according to their opin-
ion, there would be no successor. However, only Allah knows the
hidden realities of earthly and heavenly opinions and their poten-
tial consequences. Who can awaken these individuals from their
slumber and alert them to this calamity?
Certainly, many of these monarchs have committed excesses
against their own souls, surpassing the bounds of luxury and
opulence, and made themselves hostages to immorality, idle-
ness, and disobedience. They persist in pursuing alluring women,
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
29
resorting to deceitful means to make contact, even if it entails
indecency, and they lavish large sums of money as if a full moon
had descended from the sky. Their powers were depleted by
debauchery and wrongdoing, and their vigour and attractiveness
faded while consumed by thoughts of women and palaces. Many
of them are now left with empty coffers, their happiness vanished,
their abundant possessions replaced by peril, and their authority
lost due to chasing after woman. After wealth and affluence, they
are now stricken with poverty. Their eyes grew weary from sor-
row, and their anguish persists, yet they remain enslaved to their
desires. Their indulgences have left them with grey hair, diseases,
and misfortune. They do not avoid excessive transgression and
exceeding limits in attaining fortunes like the wicked, so that the
matter leads to the declining of health and the imbalance of the
body. They lose themselves wishing for the return of the days of fit-
ness and strength. It is as if they devoted their bodies and strength
to prostitutes and preferred their love over the protection of the
self, honour, and religion.
These are people who have become the reflection of Satan
and possess no goodness within themselves. You see their natures
like rugged land with cracks, changing from morning to evening.
You see their hearts darkened with arrogance and vanity, as if it
were a part of the long dark night. They rejoice in stalls full of
horses, mules, oxen, and camels, or women of splendour, beauty,
and charm. They do not fulfil their obligations, nor do they fear
the day of departing this world or the hour in which they will be
held accountable. They spend their days adorning themselves,
combing their hair, and applying kohl [to their eyes]. Nothing
of the behaviour of men remains in them. If you see them, you
30
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
will despise them, thinking them to be escorts or slaves who have
been adorned for sale after being enslaved. They do not pray reg-
ularly, and their desires have become a hurdle and obstacle in
their paths. If they do pray, they pray at home like women, and
they do not attend mosques like the pious. How can they come
to the mosques if they do not part with the cup of wine, nor leave
the filth of their drinking companions, nor bear to hear a word
of exhortation? Pride incites them to arrogance and conceit, and
they rage with anger and jealousy. The most honourable people
in their eyes are those who make their condition beautiful and
praise them and their deeds. Likewise, their morals became cor-
rupted as a result of constant wine drinking, that the vine tree
uprooted them from being sons of the nobles. What remained of
their concerns was that they should have a lofty palace, pleasant
food, and tangy drink. No sound of their troops can be heard, and
for this reason calamity and loss befell them. They were skinned
like sheep being sheared, and they were trimmed like branches.
They were taken like animals, and cut down like twigs. They lost
their state and emirate, just as a garment falls from a saddlebag.
When Allah saw their immorality and debauchery, their
injustice and falsehood, and their ingratitude, He subdued them
through a people that climbed over their walls and everything
that was high, took possession of what their fathers had owned,
and hastened forth from every height. And this decree was bound
to be carried out. You read it in the Quran, but you do not pon-
der. Priests followed in their footsteps, misleading the people, and
deceiving them, luring them into their false religion with money,
women, and everything they embellish. So, the foolish people sell
the faith of Allah for loaves of bread, women, and other desires,
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
31
as you see. And all the sin is on the kings because they did not
improve the affairs of their subjects, they did not see their cor-
ruptions as a disaster, and they did not care. So, their worldly
affairs were upended because they surrendered the piety of the
hearts and were daring in sin. And Allah does not change the con-
dition of a people until they change what is in themselves, nor
are they shown mercy. Rather, Allah curses those homes in which
people are immoral, and those countries in which sin is commit-
ted. Angels descend upon the house of immorality and injustice
and say, "O abode! May Allah destroy you, and O wall! May He
ruin you." And the command of Allah descends, and then they
perish. Allah creates a reason for the demolition of those walls
and the destruction of those countries, hence a people come and
raze them from their foundations. This is why they do so. So do
not curse the Christian monarchs, and do not remember what
touched you at their hands, and do not blame anyone but your-
selves, O transgressors.
Do you hear what I am telling you? Surely not, but you frown
and curse. How can you have ears to hear and hearts to under-
stand? Where do you find the time to transition from eating to
reasoning, and to abandon the intoxication of liquor and pay
attention to [God] the One that compensates? And where among
you are the young people who remember? Do you curse your ene-
mies while you have not attained anything except the reward for
what you used to do?
And know, that if you had been righteous, then the kings
would have also been made righteous for you. This is how the law
of Allah has been implemented for the people who are pious. So
stop praising the Muslim kings and ask forgiveness for them if you
32
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
are sincere advisors. Do not approach them with food containing
poison, lest they eat and die, while you live with them in pros-
perity and draw from their waste. If harm befalls them, how can
you be protected? They own your necks, your honour, and your
wealth, so be sincere to those who own you. Allah has made them
as equipment for you and made you as tools for them, so help one
another in righteousness and piety if you are sincere. Alert them
to their bad deeds and inform them of their lapses if you are not
hypocrites.
By Allah, they are a people who do not fulfil the rights of
those whom they have been appointed over, nor do they uphold
their obligations or covenants. You can recognise the truth of this
matter by their faces, which change more than their minds, and by
their outfits, which are more wretched than their condition. It is
as if their insides have been mutilated and as if they were created
in a state that they do not know. By Allah, we see that their hearts
are even harder than the stones of mountains, and their natures
are fiercer than that of tigers and serpents. They are a people who
do not supplicate. From these deeds and actions, it is evident that
they have displeased their Lord and chosen the paths of misguid-
ance. They have consumed lethal poison and distributed it among
their subjects, thus bearing two shares of the evil consequences:
they will enter Hell and also lead others into it.
Everything that has befallen Islam is a result of their evil deeds
and corrupt actions. O theologians! Is there a man among you who
can explain the consequences of these qualities to them? They are
people who have forsaken their religion for evil inclinations and
wasted deeds, resembling a cross-eyed person in all events. Indeed,
I see them as blind and unable to see. I do not say to you to sever
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
33
your bonds with them and resort to the path of transgression
and conflict. Instead, beseech Allah the Most Majestic for their
reformation so that they may desist. Do not anticipate that they
will rectify what the hands of the Antichrist has ruined or rebuild
the nation after its collapse and evident imbalance. Remember,
every field has its heroes. Is there hope of reviving people from
the dead? Or seeking guidance from the misguided? Or rain from
clear skies? Or for camels to pass through the eye of a needle? So,
how can you expect these from them?
By Allah, we do not anticipate their reform until the approach
of death awakens them. Yet, the duty of reminding has been
entrusted to us. We regard them as a fleeting bird that cannot be
captured, or as life irretrievably lost, or as bats whose presence
brings ruin to the land, or as a town parched by drought, or as
a shade offering no refuge to the people, or like poison that rup-
tures livers. The shock of their stumbling was profound, and I
see no one capable of lifting them from their current state. They
resemble firewood rather than fruit-bearing trees, fit only for the
flames. They have lost their sense of intuition and the principles of
governance. They sought to learn the strategies of their Christian
neighbours, yet they failed to grasp the subtleties of intrigue and
the art of defence. Their situation is akin to a rooster aspiring to
match the eagle in flight, but in his attempt, he leaves his place and
falls short of the eagle's prowess, ultimately becoming exhausted
and vulnerable prey for a hawk in the field. This is the state of the
Muslims kings in comparison to the People of the Cross. They
turned away from what they had been taught of piety, failing
to achieve the perfection in strategy exhibited by their enemies.
Consequently, they found themselves neither here nor there.
34
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
Allah had decreed for the kings of His religion that He
would always support them after they demonstrated piety, and
He intended for the Christians to prevail through their ploys
when the believers had incurred the displeasure of their Lord.
Unfortunately, in these times, we witness Muslim kings straying
from the boundaries set by the All-Knowing Allah, neither within
themselves nor in their rules. Instead, what persists among them
is an insatiable desire for twenty varieties of fried food and sev-
enty alluring, virtuous women or concubines, while they remain
ignorant of proper judgment. Do you think their throne is the
haven of security, whereas all that remains is like ashes? Do you
think they are protecting the borders of Islam from the infidels?
Nay, rather, they invite them out of carelessness to take possession
of what remains of the ruins of the religion. Do you claim that
they are the refuge of Islam? Holy is Allah! What a big mistake
this is! Instead, they uproot the religion of the Best of Creation $as
with their innovations. You may hold a good opinion of them
and absolve them of their misdeeds, but what evidence supports
this? Do you believe they safeguard the sanctity of Allah and His
Messengeras as true servants would? No, rather, the sanctity [of
Allah and His Messengers as] shields them as they profess to be
Muslims and claim to love the Best of Creationsas. Just punish-
ment will be rightfully administered if they do not repent before
Allah the All-Powerful and the All-Knowing. Who among you
reminds them of the Days of Allah and warns them of the severe
consequences?
Do you not see that Islam has been shattered by a long period
of calamities and dire oppression? And that tribulations have
rained down upon it with a weight heavier than heavy rain, and
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
35
hordes of enemies have risen up to hunt it down like a hunter?
Nothing remains that pleases the hearts or averts distress. Muslims
appear as thirsty wanderers in the wild, as sick individuals in the
throes of illness, with hardly a speck of life, or a drop of sweet
water, or a peel of fruit. They have been afflicted with all kinds of
diseases and various types of symptoms. All that is
apparent and
what is hidden in them has been corrupted. Both their ignorant
and wise have become weak. Blindness has struck those among
them who left the homeland or stayed in it. Their prosperous days
have disappeared and been replaced by tragic events. The religion
has been changed and is almost ruined. Its sea has become dry,
and people have preferred lies over truth, and a place of refuse
over a spacious palace. As they strayed, the world parted ways
with them, and they became accustomed to affectation. Upon
forsaking justice and equality, they bid farewell to gold and sil-
ver. This truth is unveiled to those who have endured the twists
of time, who witness the flames igniting among both the elite and
the common.
Today, Muslim nights are bereft of moonlight, their watchers
forming groups; some pass by them with laughter, while others
observe with tears in their eyes. You witness hearts growing cal-
lous, sins multiplying, chests constricting, minds troubled, heed-
lessness, laziness, and disobedience rampant. Ignorance, misguid-
ance, and tyranny prevail, while piety disappeared and is snatched
away by Satan. There is no light left in the hearts from which faith
can be strengthened. Eyes, tongues, and ears have become impure.
Beliefs have been corrupted, and knowledge has been taken away,
while ignorance and blindness have appeared. Ostentation has
entered worship, and arrogance has entered asceticism. Misery
36
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
has appeared, and traces of happiness have vanished. Love and
unity have not remained, and hatred and discord have manifested.
There remains no sin or ignorance that is not present among
Muslims, and there is no humiliation or misguidance that is not
present among their women, men, and children, especially since
their leaders have deviated from the right path or have sat down
or have walked like the lame. You see some of them the most
unjust among those who are alive and dead, and the command of
Allah was presented to them, yet they remained silent as if they
were mute. They became the first to reject the truth and deceive.
Therefore, the people were seized with the plague, and the ani-
mals with death. Signs appeared, but they did not accept them, so
the wrath of the Most Gracious descended. And when they saw
the punishment, they said, "Indeed, we augur evil fortune from
you, and due to your lies, the plague came." It was said, "Your evil
fortune is with your own selves. Do you say this because you have
been admonished? Nay, you are a people transgressing all bounds."
And Allah has not sent any Messenger except that a punishment
from heaven and earth will be sent with him, so that they might
return. Likewise, in the time of the Messiah, the bacterial neck
disease was a temporary torment, and indeed, this is a sign for
people who reflect.
Do they not see how Allah preserved this village [Qadian],
fulfilled His promise, made it a peaceful land, while He seized the
people around it? Surely, in that is a sign for those who contem-
plate. Do they not observe how the plague has borne its teeth in
other villages, yet Allah has shielded this village, enabling the ful-
filment of a promise whispered already among the people? And
who is more truthful in words than Allah? Reflect, therefore, if
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
37
you possess piety. By Allah, it stands as a profound sign for those
with insight. So, seek counsel from those who have witnessed it,
and continue to witness it, if you are uncertain. Do not blindly fol-
low
your evil leaders, and turn to Allah in repentance, O deniers
of truth. Have you not noticed how calamities have befallen you
and your kings, O aggressors? Decadence has become evident,
leaving no trace of vibrancy or vitality. You see most of them look-
ing wretched, akin to shallow water or a man being raided. Then
groups of priests attacked them on the ill-fated day, that many peo-
ple entered the Christian religion and became enemies of Allah
and His Messengeras, the Best of Creation. So show me which
of your kings made an ark during this flood? Rather, they were
drowned with those who were drowned. Their nails were clipped
short by the clippers of time, their faces covered by darkness. Time
has drained their vigour, leaving them bereft of dominance. They
plotted, but their ploys availed them naught. Tribulations arose
that eluded resolution through councils and forums, nor could
they be resolved by assembling emissaries on the enemy's borders.
Even if they take up arms and dispatch conscripted soldiers, their
destiny will be naught but shame, defeat, and profound humilia-
tion. Their existence did not benefit the noble Shariah. Instead,
Islam rode a feeble steed across uneven, barren terrain, with its
kings imprisoned by their desires, worshipping the fire of their
own passions, like the Magians [who worship fire]. And what rela-
tion does one who grazes in the satanic land have with the gardens
of the Gracious God? Thus, I perceive religion in their time as
a body afflicted with measles, boils, and various pustules erupt-
ing from within. It is wounded from the outside by many knives,
spears, and swords, with its fertile seed destroyed and its lofty
38
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
palm tree burned. While there was a time when its beauty used to
please the beholders, and looking at its clouds cleared the minds.
Today, it is like a tree in whose shade bats have roosted in, or a
spring where not a drop of its pure water remains. All power and
blessing that once resided within this religion began to depart,
leaving behind only stories from the verses and the superficiality
of the clear Book. It resembles a house whose owner has passed
away, its mourners dispersed, its walls crumbled, and its structure
shaken.
you
So, what are the methods of healing, O physicians? Do you
find these leaders repelling this affliction? Do you expect these
kings to cleanse the garden of religion from these thorns? Or do
think that these diseases can be cured within the Islamic coun-
tries through their known efforts? Surely not! It is a more difficult
matter than expecting fresh dates from Zaqqüm. How can it be
while they are in the grip of sombre silence? How can they raise
their heads while burdened with thousands of worries? I tell you
honestly that the truth is that these afflictions cannot be averted
by the kings and leaders. Can a blind person guide another blind,
O people of cunningness?
Moreover, these kings, even if they are Muslims or sincere
ones who offer solace, their souls do not resemble those of the
perfect and purified. They have not been bestowed with the light
and attraction possessed by the sanctified ones. Surely light never
descends from heaven except upon a heart that has been scorched
by the fires of [divine] devotion; it is then endowed with true love,
cleansed by the spring of pleasure, and adorned with the kohl of
insight, honesty, and serenity. And then it is clothed with the
robes of [spiritual] elevation and choice and granted the station
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
39
of al-Baqā' [eternal life]. How can someone shrouded in thick
darkness dispel darkness itself? How can they rouse someone who
slumbers the couches of pleasure?
upon
The truth is that the kings of this time have no connection with
spiritual matters. Allah has diverted their endeavours to physical
policies, and under some divine wisdom has appointed them to
support the superficial [matters] of religion and restricted their
focus to political matters. So, what relation do they have with the
essence and truth [of religion]? Their obligations are nothing more
than that they should be well organised to protect the borders of
Islam, guard the physical frontiers of the land and shield it from
the clutches of vile enemies. As for the inner beings of the people,
cleansing them from impurities, saving them from the evil of the
deceitful whisperer, and protecting them from afflictions through
determination and supplications, is a matter beyond the power
and pursuits of the kings, as it is not hidden from those endowed
with reason. The reins of sovereignty was not entrusted in the
hands of the sultans except to protect the Islamic image from the
oppression of the devils, and not to purify souls and enlighten the
blind. The extent of their effort was to ensure taxes were paid to
them, either by force or by consent, and such offices were estab-
lished for calculating number of lands, and to establish a military
force similar to the enemy, and to set up a regiment for internal
political affairs, enforcing rules, judiciary matters, and execut-
ing orders. If you ask them to undertake the service of reforming
souls, refining morals, and rescuing people from the delusions of
the priests, then that surpasses their ambitions and intellects. This
[service] is a lofty beacon far superior than their constructions.
40
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
Instead, they are absorbed in material and political reforms, so
what role do they have in academic and practical reforms?
In essence, kings and officials possess no power to remove
ill desires. How can they then guide others while stumbling
like blind she-camels? How can a perverse heart be expected to
straighten a hostile soul, to bring joy to the miserable, to extend
a hand to the weary and lead the weak, to open the eyes of the
blind, and unveil the veiled? Instead, the Muslim kings in these
times resemble drunkards or prisoners, or like the eclipsed moon
among
the radiance of the Christians. How can actions, akin to
those of warriors, emerge from their arms? Rather, they remain
inactive like girls at home.
Among the flaws of these kings is their neglect in propa-
gating Arabic, instead favouring Turkish or Persian. Yet, it was
incumbent upon them to promote Arabic across Islamic lands,
as it is the language of Allah, His Messengeras, and the Purified
Scriptures. We do not look with reverence at those who fail to
honour this language and neglect to disseminate it in their coun-
tries as a means to repel Satan. This is one of the primary causes of
their affliction and the indicators of their misfortune. They have
strayed from the path of a purified garden onto a heap of dung,
squandering their riches, abandoning their wealth, and exchang-
ing what is high and lofty for what is base, and resembled the peo-
ple of Moses as. If they had so desired, they could have made Arabic
the language of the masses. By following this path, they would
have shielded themselves from reproach, for Arabic is the mother
of all tongues, containing within it a treasure of wonders and a
repository of strength.
The conduct of a Muslim who forsakes Arabic in favour of
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
41
other languages is akin to a despised individual consuming pork
while neglecting superior and sweeter sustenance. Undoubtedly,
Turkish and Persian encroached upon them like thieves, diluting
their faith and plundering their resources, akin to a wolf preying
upon their necks, dismantling their authority, and damaging their
worldly and spiritual destinies, leaving them crushed like kohl or
flour. And we speak only the truth.
He has spoken a lie who extols them with praise or writes
about them with words that fill his mouth, deems them Allah's
successors on earth, and labels those who refute his assertion as
disobedient. He shows no concern for the caliph of the country
himself, but rather for his bountiful treasury. He endeavours to
offer some words of praise, hoping for a reward, and turns a blind
eye to the caliph's faults in pursuit of financial gain. The truth is
that attributing the caliphate to them is against the truth, is a lie
and an injustice.
This is the state of the sultans', O young men. Afterward, I
will mention the scholars of this era, to whom virtue and knowl-
edge are attributed. It is Allah alone whose help is to be sought,
and there is no need for translation and translators, for they claim
expertise in linguistics.
1. When I am referring to the kings of Islam, I do not mean that all of
them are unjust or corrupt. Rather some of them are virtuous, treat-
ing people fairly and with compassion, like the Ottoman Sultan, whom
we commend for his known virtues. However, the concept of Khilāfah
[Caliphate] is complex and it is entrusted only to those who possess
discernment, not those who are blind. This arrow is not given to every
quiver (this responsibility is not bestowed upon just anyone), regardless
of their rank or status. (Author)
42
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
The Scholars of this Era
Given the evidence presented in the preceding statement, it is clear
that the Muslim rulers in this era have been unable to rectify the
widespread corruption that has spread like wildfire. Nevertheless,
it remains valid for you to assert that these tribulations stem from
the ignorance of the uninformed and can be eradicated through
the guidance of scholars. They are the rightful inheritors of the
Prophet's as legacy and the champions in this domain. Enlightened
by the radiance of knowledge, they are anticipated to rectify what
the rulers of states have failed to address.
Know that I have always attended the gatherings of these
scholars, often finding myself alone with them as a confidant.
Sometimes, I approached them in the guise of a stranger or an
ignorant individual, experiencing first-hand their love, resent-
ment, hardship, and prosperity. Through these encounters, I
learned about their character, determination, and piety. It has
become apparent to me that many of them are more of a detri-
ment to Islam than a remedy. They are like a severe attack or fierce
storm to the religion rather than illuminating it like a bright lamp
or light. They accumulate every defect in their behaviour and
character, staining themselves with numerous flaws. They come
up with all sorts of schemes, means, and tricks to seize people's
wealth for themselves. They speak without practicing what they
preach, teaching without learning. They desire to harvest without
planting, exhibiting hard hearts, vulgar tongues, darkened chests,
feeble opinions, inflexible dispositions, deficient minds, weak res-
olutions, and corrupt deeds. What you can observe is their intent
towards those who dissent from their views: they resort to any
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
43
means to accuse them of disbelief or inflict harm upon them. They
strive to seize their wealth through any method available. They are
arrogant despite possessing only superficial knowledge, and they
are nothing but like donkeys'.
They instruct people to forsake the world and its allurements,
yet they themselves covet it more than the average person, resort-
ing to attaining in it, even through illicit means. They take advan-
tage of the charity of the rich filling their pockets like strangers.
They resort to begging, even enduring punches or blows in return.
They attend funerals not for prayer but for alms. They do not
accept the truth or understand it, even if it is a statement that
makes the deaf hear and compels the stubborn to relinquish their
opinions. Cowardice is one of their traits, and the bird of desire
nests comfortably within them. Miserliness is imbued in their
nature, envy serves as their religion, and distorting the Shariah is
their way. When angered, they transform into wolves, and when
they eat, they are like animals.
Their discontent and contentment are solely for their evil
egos. Their remembrance and praise of Allah serve only for show.
Observe them in public gatherings, and not in private, to witness
them with prayer beads in hand, concealing actions that can ruin
your perception of this group. They compel people to give them
whatever money or clothing they possess, even if lying in the dust
(pretending to be poor) leads them to the brink of death. They
assert dominion over people's necks as if they were their masters.
If they want, they label them as angels or brethren of the devil.
1. These words of mine are not regarding the noble among them, rather,
they are about the wicked among them. (Author)
44
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
When required to testify, they withhold the truth; when asked
for a fatwa, they conceal the truth and lie, driven by greed of a
little gain.
They lead people in Prayers as if they were hired labourers.
In fact, you will find some unlawfully exploit mosque endow-
ments, depriving the poor of their rights. They adamantly refuse
to relinquish their leadership, asserting, “This is my mosque, and I
have led [the Prayers] for more than sixty [years]," even if another
Imam is more qualified, knowledgeable, and pious. Despite being
disliked by the congregation and perceived as sinful, they resort to
pleading with rulers to retain their position, motivated solely by
greed for the money allocated for the mosque.
And there are those among them who, upon seeing the wealth
you have earned or the treasures you have acquired, would gather
around you like flies, approaching you as if they were dear friends.
They would not depart from your doorstep until they had eaten
from your fruits. You will discover that the hearts of the majority
among them resemble barren land, and
among the most desolate
patches of stony ground. They fail to produce any fruit; instead,
all you witness is harm emanating from them. There is no hint
of tolerance within them; instead, they resemble wild beasts with
sharp teeth and harsh tongues. They approach you cloaked in
sheepskins, yet they are beasts that devour through all manner
of slander, as long as they are not offered an agate shield. They
present themselves to the public adorned with hats, smocks, tur-
bans, and mantles, carrying books and wearing cloaks. This is the
facade they project, but their actions reveal otherwise. They have
embarked on a quest for worldly pursuits, forsaking the abode of
the Hereafter to which they are destined to return.
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
45
When asked if they consume questionable sustenance, they
respond, "We have no issue; we are compelled by necessity.” Yet,
they are not compelled; they are simply lying. They have forsaken
the secure abode of righteousness and settled in a land where peo-
ple are assassinated and kidnapped.
They trade religion for gaining bread, and eagerly seek what
comes without cost. Their pens craft false fatwas and malicious
accusations, and their faith can be bought with a mere coin or two.
They obstruct others from the truth and whisper like demons. At
the sight of a table set with diverse dishes, they fall on it like flies
or descend upon it like vultures upon carrion. They solicit funds
from people through emotional sermons, and they hunt their vic-
tims disguised as jurists. Their sole occupation is scheming; where
can one find a hunter akin to them? Thus, the books of fables were
penned to show their deeds, while the reality of their circum-
stances was elucidated in hypothetical tales. Some orators dubbed
them Abul-Fath al-Iskandari, while others named them Abū Zayd
al-Surūji; yet, they are naught but these scholars. So take a lesson,
O people of discernment.
Those who crafted such narratives did so only after their hearts
trembled upon witnessing the actions of these scholars, and their
skin crawled at the sight of the manipulations of these deceitful
individuals. They perceived them as people whose words profess
belief while their hearts harbour disbelief. Thus, they composed
rhythmic tales as a cautionary message to the unaware, attributing
their creation and narration to others out of fear of retribution
from the malevolent.
Similarly, they bore witness to their grievances against the
scholars. Had they lived in our era, they would have exposed their
46
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
deceitfulness, but they were not deemed as writers. The scholars
of yore possessed eloquent speech, even if their faith was lacking.
As for the haughty individuals prevalent in our time, scattered
throughout every township like a herd of sheep, they are merely
worshippers of material sustenance, not of literature nor of the
scholarly pursuits. They were not nurtured on the milk of elo-
quence, nor did they imbibe the
of reasoned argument. They
often remain silent for thousand times, only to engage in conten-
tious dialogue thereafter. They lack deep knowledge of Arabic
sciences and are not refined in literary discernment. Their pride
swells, while their contemplation wanes.
cup
They are incapable of speaking words that benefit others;
instead, their speech just fosters suspicion and doubt. When they
remain silent, it signifies neglect of duty and leads to misinforma-
tion; when they speak, their words lack impact and effect. Their
resolve has weakened, and their determination has waned. They
are acquainted only with wishes like the Jews, and their prayers are
merely [customary] standing and sitting.
They have nothing to do with the intricacies of the Shariah,
nor with the subtleties of the religion. If you were to critique them,
you would find that most of them are vile and behave like animals,
and it will lead you to believe that their existence is a calamity
for Islam. They resemble vicious individuals in their obscenity
and behave like dogs in conflict. They seem to believe they can
be left unbridled, living as if there is no tomorrow beyond today.
The truth is not covered with a veil, but misery overcame them.
For them, declaring people as infidels is an easy matter - and the
belief in the death of Jesus as is a clear proof-and by Allah, they do
not desire for the victory of Islam, but rather for the victory of the
priests like the mean enemies.
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
47
They leave the religion [of Islam] in darkness, and support
the Christian doctrine with their nonsense, and the errors and
ignorance of their forefathers. They were commanded to follow
the Arbiter that is to descend from heaven, and not to oppose
him with arguments. They did not obey the command of Allah
the Most Loving. Rather, when the Promised Messiah appeared
among them, they disbelieved in him as if they were Jews. That
Promise One has descended at the time of the dominance of the
Cross, and when Islam had fully overturned. So, did the scholars
follow this Messiah? No, on the contrary, they labelled him as a
disbeliever and displayed hateful disbelief. They insisted on false-
hoods and served the priests, so the priests seized them, cut their
heads, and made them taste what the prisoner tastes, so they saw
the unfortunate day.
The foolish among the people will say that the British
Government helped the priests and supported them with schemes
like a steep mountain, in order to evangelise the Muslims, so what
is the crime that scholars did? This is not the case, and the schol-
ars are not excused. As the state did not support the priests with
its wealth or with fighting soldiers and did not give them more
freedom than the freedom given to you, in this case the doubters
would have doubted. Rather, it spread a law that is equal between
us and them, and it has a right over you if you were grateful.
Do you want to do evil to a people who have done good to you
while Allah does not like the ungrateful and unthankful? A part
of their benevolence is that you live in security and safety, while
you used to be snatched away in these countries before this state.
But today, no fly, bug, or any of your neighbours can harm you,
and your night is safer than the day you spent during the era of
the previous people. And from the state, there are guardians over
48
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
you so that you are protected from thieves and aggressors. Is the
reward for goodness other than goodness?
Indeed, we saw before it a painful time, during which destruc-
tion loomed. Today, with its shield, paradise has been offered
to us. We pick from its fruits and take refuge in its trees. That is
why I have said more than once that Jihad and raising the sword
against the Government is a great sin, how can a benefactor harm
someone who is generous? Whoever harms their benefactor is
wretched. The denial of good that befalls you from a person or
an animal is nothing but the denial of the blessing of the Most
Gracious. The cruellest of hearts in the eyes of Allah the Gracious,
is a heart that forgets the benevolence of the merciful benefactor
and injures a person who sheltered them as a beloved and saved
them from distress.
And whoever harms the benefactor has a cursed heart or he is
akin to a mad dog. Therefore, it does not behove the believers to
kill the priests, for they did not carry weapons, and did not kill a
Muslim man or Muslim woman for the sake of religion. So, it is
not righteousness to draw swords on them, or to sharpen spears
to harm them, but rather, prepare for them what is equivalent to
what they have prepared for you, that is the commandment of the
Quran. Thus, understand and be diligent, and do not transgress.
Indeed, Allah does not like the transgressors.
Certainly, an evil or blind person will attack me and say: Woe
to you, do you forbid Jihad, while we are waiting for the Mahdi
who will shed blood, conquer countries, and capture everyone
who shows disbelief and stubbornness? The answer is that these
stories are not proven in the Quran. Rather, the Mahdi will come
with dignity and tranquillity, not like a madman with sword and
spear. How can a sound mind and clear understanding accept
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
49
that the Mahdi would emerge with a drawn sword and kill the
unmindful? Allah would not punish a nation before making it
understand with signs and proofs.
This is an action that we cannot find anything similar to in
the practices of the Messengers. Such an act would only be carried
out by those lacking sound mind. Therefore, balance your reason-
ing and do not solely rely on traditional narratives. Be cautious of
the criticism of the wise and reject the sharp sword, do not favour
stabbing and striking, and do not forget the Hadith,
1
Why do you not take a share of love, like the honest and trust-
worthy brothers? Do you have nothing except swords, lances and
spears, or have you abandoned the ways of reason?
Indeed, the Mahdi has come, and those who recognise him
have acknowledged his presence. He is the one who speaks to you,
O those who slumber. You found him, only to lose him, as if you
never knew him. These scholars have labelled me a disbeliever
through forgery and deception. How could they not, when the
sheikh, who serves as the mufti, is Satan?
The priests were delighted and excited by the presence of these
scholars, drawing them close to foster friendship, as they chose to
lie in order to make Jesus as alive, adorning falsehoods. They for-
got that the resting place of the son of Mary as is in Kashmir. So,
when the priests saw, after practice and experience, that they had
supported them by taking Jesus as as a god, they told us that the
Muslims have a testimony to the greatness of our Lord Christ, for
they acknowledge his divine attributes openly.
1. He will put an end to war (Fatḥul-Bārī bi Sharḥi Ṣaḥīḥil-Bukhārī, lil
Imamil-Hafiz Aḥmad bin 'Ali bin Hajar al-Asqalānī, vol. 7, Dārul-
Ma'rifah, Beirut, Lebanon, Hadith no. 3448). [Publisher]
50
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
They did not lie in this statement, even if they were liars in the
eyes of the Most Gracious, as you know that these scholars have
uttered such words about Jesus as, the meaning of which is noth-
ing other than that they attributed him to Allah as someone who
was adopted. The Islamic State will not return to its former glory,
unless they fear Allah, unite, and trample this doctrine under
their feet. They will face degradation and be brought low every
day unless they fear God and count Jesus as among the dead.
By Allah, I see that the life of Islam lies in the death of the son
of Maryas, so blessed is the one who comprehends this reality and
enables others to understand it. Do you not see how the priests
insist on his being alive, and prove his divinity from his attributes?
For the sake of Allah and His pleasure, is there not among you a
man who refutes [this claim]? Who can prove that Jesus as is among
the dead, and prove his words true from all angles, straightening
his arrow and grasping it tightly, and vanquishing adversaries with
flawless aim? No! Instead, you aid and support them, celebrating
the tolling of their bells, yet veiling your faces.
Are you priests or Muslims? Do you revolve around them,
hoping for sustenance from them? Do you hold them in reverence
and honour? By Allah, all honour belongs to Him, and to Him
belongs the treasures of the heavens and the earth, and everything
you aspire to attain. What has befallen you that you do not believe
in Allah and do not place your trust in Him?
The scholars are not all alike; some are righteous, while oth-
ers are disobedient. Those who fear Allah, I speak of them with
goodness alone, Allah will guide them, and they will perceive the
truth. When prompted to denounce the man proclaiming, “I
am the Messiah" as a disbeliever, they respond, "Why should we
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
51
speak without knowledge? We indeed fear Allah.” [They further
say], "Anyone who hastily rejects Moses as, Jesus as, and our chosen
Prophetas has erred, so why do you hasten? If he is a liar, the sin
of his falsehood will be upon him. But if he speaks the truth, then
we fear disobeying Allah and those He sends."
And there are others among them who believed in the truth,
endured persecution with steadfastness. They were expelled from
their homes and mosques, and were scorned after being once
revered. Witnessing signs and lights descending from the heav-
ens, their faith strengthened, knowledge illuminated, and due to
the truth, which they have recognised, they were content despite
every trial. They abandoned this world and draw closer to Allah
each day. You see their eyes overflow with tears, “Our Lord, we
heard a caller and saw a guide, and believed in him. Our Lord,
forgive us, remove our sins, and let not death overtake us except
when we are steadfast in faith."
Those are the ones who pleased their Lord and abandoned
their friends for Him. Some of them were attacked and killed. It
is these on whom are blessings from Allah, and it is these who
are rightly guided. Those who received the glad tidings of the
coming of the Messiah, yet refused to accept it—they are the ones
deprived. They imitate the Christians with their beliefs while they
are unaware. They say that the priests are closer to the truth than
you. It is these whom Allah, the angels, and all the righteous have
cursed. No one befriended these unfortunate ones except
who turned away, and no heart shared mutual love with them
except that which became like a dog and had forsaken the light,
growing in ignorance, devoid of knowledge. They will realise
when Allah manifests His glory.
those
52
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
Do they not see the plague? Do they not see the arrows of
the wicked, blazing like flames of fire? The enemy has descended
upon their domain, ready to attack, yet they fail to confront the
foes and remain unprepared, forgetting the deceitful schemes
with which they destroyed and distorted the faith.
Behold these scholars, who did not enter the house of truth
through its white door, but instead climbed its walls with audac-
ity. Out of the mercy of Allah the Lord of Wonders, the Messiah
came to them with the finest knowledge, yet, they did not trouble
themselves to approach him. The fire of temptation blazed, caus-
ing the waters of heaven to rain, and Allah's Messiah descended
after all kinds of calamities had befallen the people.
You can see how priests became powerful, and Christianity
spread. The lights of faith dimmed, and religious studies waned
in this era. Faith-related issues became locked doors, only to be
opened by the Most Gracious. Today, if the reins of religion are in
the hands of these scholars, the fate of the noble Shariah is uncer-
tain. When called to debate, they falter like a dumbfounded and
retreat, becoming a source of Islam's disdain. How can one go to
war without training to stab and strike?
By Allah, they are a people whose words lack strength, nor do
their
pens hold any power. Yet, within their words lies the poison
of hypocrisy; they do not speak out of sincerity and piety. Instead,
their words reek of ignorance, prejudice, and thoughtlessness.
They bear no trace of spirituality nor any scent of faith; their
outcome is but a hoard of doubt and mistrust. No knowledge of
the unseen trickles into their hearts, thus they cannot appease the
doubters or refute the objectors. Instead, they themselves dwell in
doubt and are among those who waver [in their faith].
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
53
From many of them, we detect the scent of atheism. Their
words are mere dung, or like a corpse buried without shroud. They
are nothing but a disgrace to Islam and a perdition to Muslims,
particularly at this time as people seek someone to lead them from
the darkness of doubt into the light of certainty. They need words
to soothe the soul, dispel confusion, manifest the hidden truth,
and clarify the veiled.
Where among them is a man possessing such qualities? How
can a rock be broken without iron? Where is the eloquent whose
words can draw people to his gatherings? Is there an orator whose
utterances can captivate people with its beauty? Among them, is
there a purifier who can revive hearts, bestow tranquillity and dis-
pel distress?
Where are the words that resemble stranded pearls? Where is
the statement akin to clustered fruits easily within reach? Instead,
they incline to the earth with ardent desire. How then can [faith]
be attained by them from such a distant position? No one can
offer a sound answer, a decisive judgment, or speak closer to the
truth without the Lord of lords breathing His words into them.
So look, do you find among them someone who rebukes
opponents in every matter and silences defamers with every word
uttered? Do you find among them a pioneer in the arts of liter-
ature and eloquence, unashamed to display knowledge of the
Furqan, while upholding truth, honesty, and avoiding nonsense?
Have you seen among them someone who can daunt his coun-
terpart with eloquence? Or melt souls with flowing words, as if
his word were scattered pearls? You will not find among them a
warrior nor one that can express their knowledge. Yet, you see in
them waves of arrogance and vanity, devoid of intelligence or wit.
54
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
Despite ignorance, their heads reach the sky, walking proudly,
unabashed by arrogance, haughtiness, foolishness, hypocrisy, con-
tempt, and disdain.
How many signs have been sent down by Allah, yet they paid
no attention towards it, passing by with laughter, mocking Allah
and His messengers. They worship only their desires and fail to
contemplate. They demand, “Show us a sign from Allah!" While
signs have already manifested in the heavens and on earth for
those who are righteous. And it was said, "If you doubt my words,
then produce something similar to it." Yet they failed to produce
anything and persisted in their doubt, thereby leading to their
own destruction.
The position of scholars is both profound and perilous. Only
one to whom the gates of profound proof have been opened,
endowed with a refined vision from the Lord of the Unseen, pos-
sessing knowledge free from doubt and scepticism, yet graced
with the sweetness of eloquence and mastery of literary arts to
reveal what lies within the heart, is worthy of this service. Such
a scholar is shielded from the embarrassment of the stumbling of
the tongue, bestowed with the gift of eloquence
For those who claim the title of scholars, Allah has rendered
them no share but noise. They recite the Quran, yet it is merely
lip-service. The Furqan does not reach their hearts, and their
hearts do not reach it. Their actions bring shame even to Satan
himself. You perceive a knot on their tongue, a gripe in their hearts,
and deception in their speech. Their utterances lack evidence, and
their statements are devoid of eloquence. You view them as fool-
ish, inexperienced, lacking knowledge, and it is unclear whether
their tongues are knotted or afflicted with stutter. They seem
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
55
trapped in a narrow space with no way out, their dates eaten by
worms of their desire, leaving only a small thread of a date-stone
behind.
Their tongues go too far in disputes, and they do not prepare
arguments to refute their adversaries during debates. They fail to
reveal the essence of Islam; instead, they speak deceitfully, like one
who staggers, making Islam vulnerable to attack. These individu-
als resemble animals; it is not natural for animals to speak, and
associating with the silent is more difficult than facing death. They
pursue wealth avidly but neglect to seek enlightenment. They
present their barren clouds as rain-bearing and their unsold goods
as precious gems, akin to a deceptive hunter.
I do not speak out of envy or hastiness; I seek refuge in Allah
from
envy, falsehood, and accusation. Rather, everything I express
stems from genuine encounters and experiences, with exception
of the individuals who have virtuous dispositions and pure inten-
tions, as they are far above such criticism.
I do not label anyone as immoral unless their actions truly
reflect it, nor do I deem anyone as ignorant unless they lack
knowledge. The majority of grains lie within this pile, and if
doubt arises, scrutinise closely, examine repeatedly, and reflect
with prudence and respect. Do you perceive them as supports of
Islam and servants of faith? Do you discern within them the traits
of righteousness and intellect?
Instead, they resemble barren clouds. They are akin to haughty
and sly individuals. You will not find in them the scent of the
truthful, nor the fragrance of the wise. They mould themselves
as scholars, yet they lack the heart of the pious. They are only
like animals. They have neither been nourished by the milk of
56
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
knowledge nor have they tasted from the cup of honour bestowed
to the noble individuals.
They deceive people with the guise of scholars, adorned in
the splendour of their appearance and the beauty of their attire.
However, to the discerning wise, they are mere whitewashed
tombs. They possess naught but overgrown beards, bloated noses,
frowned faces, corrupted hearts, sharp tongues, and rotted words.
They accuse innocent people and declare Muslims as infidels.
Many of their characteristics resemble the barbaric, their deeds
mimic the actions of fools, and they inflict pain with a ferocity sur-
passing that of the desert serpents and spears of wars. They claim
to follow the morals of Idris [Enochas], yet their actions resemble
the character of Iblis [Satan].
In brief, their behaviour suggests they are not suited for this
field; instead, they seem to be individuals gripped by weakness
and laziness like women. They find contentment and reassurance
in the lowly world, inclining daily into the valley of disobedience.
With harsh tongues, they accuse others of sins and disobedience,
while their own souls are tainted by the filth of disobedience.
They rush into the places of covetousness and voraciousness,
yet hesitate in supporting the religion. They yearn for the perish-
able good of this world, deceived by fleeting little delights. They
deliver sermons from the pulpit, appearing pious and patient;
once they have offered their Prayer, they swiftly depart and forget
their own advice, akin to lifeless souls. Who among them truly
serves the religion, enduring hardship for the sake of the robust
Shariah law? Who among them has sacrificed themselves for the
cause of the religion of the Chosen Onesas, forsaking sleep out of
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
57
fervour, with bones worn defending it? Yet, laziness and neglect
thrive among them, while insight dwindles.
Are there any among them willing to journey to the distant,
uncharted realms, diving into springs or plunging into the depths
of the sea to extract pearls of knowledge sorely needed in this time?
Instead, you see them wander like drunkards in the desires of the
self and are ensnared like captives by its lusts. They are unable to
confront problems head-on or revive what has been left behind.
and forgotten. They lack the ability to reassess matters, discerning
what is right and good to avoid futile endeavours.
They do not dedicate their lives to seeking truth or sacrificing
their bodies to grasp sublime knowledge tirelessly until their path
becomes clear and the secrets of religion are absorbed into their
chests and the knowledge of certainty is placed in their hearts.
Surely not! Instead their labour is all lost in search after things
pertaining to the life of this world, and they think that they are
among the doers of good. Their words lack spirituality, and you
will find them collecting worthless things.
In our time, Islam is in dire need of sound opinions, well-de-
veloped ideas, fervent spirits, pure hearts, steadfast aspirations,
accepted supplications, continuous blessings from Allah, and
ongoing efforts toward His guidance. The window for reforming
the Ummah is narrowing, and all that remains is one final breath
of life. So, what is the use of seeking knowledge of the past if the
eye has lost sight?
O honourable ones of Islam, take a look at the present time!
One-fifth of the century has elapsed since its inception, and now
its full moon has set. Who among us has stepped forward dur-
ing this period? Who has risen to mend the shattered throne [of
58
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
Islam] and unveil its obscured radiant countenance? Know that
this gateway will not be opened by ordinary weaponry, but rather
demands irrefutable evidence, clear signs, and learned minds delv-
ing into the subtleties of the Shariah and its concealed nuances.
Those who serve Islam both visibly and internally are required, so
that hearts can find solace, the unseen becomes unveiled, and the
concealed treasures emerge into view.
O esteemed stalwarts of Islam, the trials and tribulations that
have beset you loom large. Show me, then, what provisions you
have mustered to stand against these massed adversaries? Do you
offer us the in of theses scholars, sheikhs, or the Sufis? [I declare:]
Indeed, unto Allah we belong, and unto Him is our return, in this
hour of trial and in the face of the calamity that has descended
upon our noble Shariah.
Islam now requires a man endowed with the hand of the
unseen, a privilege not bestowed upon any other. Allah has
unveiled to him what others cannot see, rendering him among
the successful, triumphant and heir to the Prophets. God has
bestowed him with the gift of distinctive knowledge, discern-
ment, courage, cognisance, exceptional opinion and fortified with
unyielding will. His knowledge transcends the ordinary, defying
convention, and bearing fruit aplenty. He did not leave him akin
to a chameleon, clinging to the boughs of trees. Rather, the seek-
ers find with him the truths they wished for and the knowledge
that had faded away. He became their source of wonders and mar-
vels, drawing people to him like the famished and downtrodden
seeking refuge, reminiscent of the Children of Israel seeking sol-
ace with Moses as. From him, they taste the mysteries, grazing in
the verdant pasture-lands of enlightenment.
 WHATISWRONGWITHTHEMUSLIMS&WHATISTHETREATMENTFORTHISTIME?
59
However, a prerequisite for a reformer of this age is to excel in
comprehension of religion and the art of rhetoric. He must pos-
sess the ability to articulate conclusive arguments surpassing even
the most skilled artisans of speech, narrating with brilliance, while
safeguarding against errors in judgment.
The reformer perceives truth and falsehood as distinct as day
and dark night, so that through him people may gain insight of
the correct matters and gather the pearls of knowledge with a
robust memory. One of his distinctive signs lies in his capacity to
revise compositions, shaping them according to his vision, shun-
ning weak expressions, and fortifying his statements with irrefu-
table evidence.
It is evident that these standards are absent within this group
[of scholars], possessing only a few of the most basic human vir-
tues. Rather, they remain unmoved by sermons and fail to embrace
the path of wisdom and rectitude.
I perceive them akin to inanimate objects or newly hatched
chicks, barely emerged from their shells. So, do you think that
these people will nullify the weapons designed by the priests for
destruction and annihilation? No, by Allah, they are akin to the
lifeless, lacking the fortitude of true men.
They have no trace of will or volition. Instead, they inflated the
world's value and significance, perceiving its waters as boundless
and its skies teeming with rain clouds. They were deceived by its
deceptive allure and superficial beauty, their desires warped their
humanity, blinding them to acts of compassion. How then can
they be relied upon to advocate Islam? Can a corpse, wrapped and
shrouded, be expected to spring back to life? Supporting religion
60
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
is not an easy mission; it is only achieved through experiencing
mortality.
Victory shall not be bestowed upon the masses and their sheer
numbers, nor will the enemy be vanquished by mere sticks and
spears. It is folly to rejoice in their presence or to expect any good
to emerge from their ranks.
So, seek out a Josephªs amidst the drought, even if it means
embarking on a lengthy and arduous journey. Pay no heed to
the attire of these scholars, for it betrays naught but miserliness,
hypocrisy, and other traits unbefitting the righteous.
I preached to them as dutifully as I could, yet they only hard-
ened in their rejection. Despite the numerous books, letters, and
newspapers I have penned, and the unparalleled gems I have dis-
seminated, neither my efforts nor my works have benefited them.
Instead, they seem most eager to harm me and inflict suffering
upon me. When Allah observed their persistent malice, He led
their hearts astray and veiled their minds. They are perverse,
they do not repent of their falsehoods or desist of rationalising
their dishonesty. Despite witnessing Islam's dwindling waters
and crumbling fortifications, they make no plea for rain from the
heavens, nor do they yearn for a chosen emissary from the Lord of
Majesty. It is as if they do not believe in Surah an-Nur and fail to
utter Āmīn after reciting al-Fātiḥah.
Allah has sealed their hearts, rendering them deaf to guidance
and blind to the compassionate counsellor, unwilling to lower
for him the wing of kindness. None among them seeks to tend
to their wounds, feather their wings, heal their hearts, or alleviate
their distress.
If a man was sent to lead them, they would say,
"He is a
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
61
fabricator and a great liar," yet they shall come to recognise who
the imposter is. The days of Allah will inevitably arrive, and they
shall return to [God] the All-Powerful and Severe in Punishment.
O scholars, think of Allah's promise and fear the Almighty,
to whom you will be returned. He established prophethood and
caliphate among the Children of Israel, then He destroyed them
because of their transgression, and sent our Prophet ¾ªs after them
and made him like Moses as, so read Surah al-Muzzammil if you
are in doubt.
sas
Indeed, He has promised Khilafah [Caliphate] for those who
believe. Reflect on Surah an-Nür if you harbour doubts. These are
two assurances from Allah, thus refrain from distorting His words
if you are righteous.
Hence, the chain of our Prophet as commenced with one akin
to Moses as and concluded with one resembling Jesusªs, fulfilling
Allah's promise faithfully and unequivocally. Verily, therein lies a
sign for those who contemplate.
It was imperative for the two chains to be equal: the former
mirroring the first and the latter mirroring the last. Do you not
read the Quran, or do you harbour disbelief in its teachings? If
your desire is for Jesus as himself to descend, then you have contra-
dicted Quranic teachings, failing to glean any illumination from
Surah an-Nür, and despite the light, you remained unable to see.
Would you seek to distort the truth after the equality of the
two chains has been established? Fear Allah and uphold justice.
What justification do you have for your lack of understanding?
Allah has promised to appoint a successor from among you, not
from among the Children of Israel.
Do not follow the dark
age and come to the Arbiter sent by
62
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
your Lord if you are seeking guidance. Do you want to prefer the
chain of Moses as over the one of your Prophet sas? That indeed is an
unfair division! Why do you not desist?
Do you not recite Surah an-Nür? Or is it that the hearts are
sealed? Or do you think that you will not return to Allah? The
Quran had indeed adjusted the balance, and gave our Prophet sas
everything that was given to the one that vanquished Pharaoh and
Hämän, so why do you not do justice? While the Quran has con-
veyed its command, so whoever disbelieves after that, those are
the transgressors.
Do you give preference to your desires over the Book of Allah,
or do you claim to possess knowledge equal to the Quran? If so,
present it to us if you are truthful. Surely not! Indeed this is what
they found their greatest people follow, so they hurried on in
their footsteps. Allah has fashioned both chains alike, yet they
increase and decrease in it. And who is more unjust than he who
takes a path other than the path of the Quran? Surely, the curse of
Allah is on the unjust. Alas for them! Will they not, then, ponder
over the Quran, or are they blind?
And when it is said to them, "Do you abandon the Book of
Allah?" They say, “We found our fathers doing it,” even if their
fathers knew nothing and did not understand. Do you leave the
words of your Lord for the sake of your fathers? Fie on you and
on that which you do!
They said, "We have seen it in the Hadith.” In fact, they did
not understand the words of the Messenger of Allah sas, they do
nothing but wander blindly. They want to differentiate between
the Book of Allah and the words of His Messenger sas. They are
forgers of lies.
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
63
Allah has made the truth clear in the Furqan, then in what
thing will they believe thereafter? They opt for doubt over cer-
tainty, a trait befitting those destined for ruin.
O people, this was a promise from Allah, and He indeed ful-
filled it by fashioning the two chains. Why then do you entertain
the notion that Allah could create disparity without apprehen-
sion? Do you attribute to Allah the violation of His covenant and
promise? Holy is He and exalted far above what you claim!
Did you think that the chain of the Chosen Onesas is not akin
to the chain of Moses as? This is nothing but a denial of the Quran,
if you understand. Are their two beginnings not similar, and their
two ends the same? Evil is what you judge.
Have you exalted Moses as and debased the Chosen One Sas?
Shame on you and your deeds! Have you failed to maintain bal-
ance even after adjusting the scales, neglecting to uphold justice?
Allah showed the virtue of this chain by sealing the matter
[of Islam] by it, and then you bring Jesus as to it while you know!
What is the matter with you that you do not give someone his due
virtue and do wrong?
Would you cut off the leg of this chain and keep its head? This
is nothing but the action of a madman. Do you distort the Word
of Allah as you perverted it before and said what you have said
about the verse,
1
فَلمَّا تَوَفَّيْتَنِي
1. But since Thou didst cause me to die (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:118).
[Publisher]
64
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
the
And you did not fear your Lord to whom you will be driven to.
The reward for those who distort Allah's words is nothing but
fire, so why do you not repent? Those who deliberately pervert
word of Allah, their abode is hell, and they will be burned therein.
Except those who sinned before this time of mine and before the
command of Allah and His arbiter reached them. These are peo-
ple who will be forgiven for what they did not know.
And those who insist on it after they have been warned and
disobey their Lord are the transgressors. Whoever distorts the
Word of Allah has shed the blood of all people, and they are
the cursed. They are blind and have never been bestowed sight.
Between the truth and them, there is a wall, and their Satan gave
them a drink; they consumed it without realising it was poisoned.
So do not think that they are alive, for they are dead, and they will
remember what they did yesterday when they see a day that has
might.
They denied the truth that was established, and you see them
as bats that hate the light and hide themselves. A caller to Allah
came to them, but they did not welcome him. The morning light
dawned on them, but they did not wake up. The door of mercy
was opened for them, but they did not enter and remained negli-
gent. They laugh at a man whose tears do not stop out of compas-
sion for their condition, and his tears flow down out of anguish
for their fate. They saw signs, but they did not accept. I swore by
Allah to them, but they did not believe. I presented the Quran to
them, but they did not pay attention. So I complain to Allah, the
Lord of Creation, about the difficulty of these issues that were not
solved, neither by testimony nor by swearing.
I have called them since I was young and wasted a lot of time
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
65
for their sake. I was a man strutting along in the cloak of youth,
resembling an archer, but now you see that the young man has
become old. This is a place of contemplation for those who reflect.
Can someone like me attribute false sayings to Allah and given a
respite until he is sixty years old?
There is no covering of the truth, O seekers, but rather it was
sealed on their hearts by what they used to earn. The sun has risen,
but only the eyes of the pious will be opened, and Allah's wrath
will descend on those who are disobedient. They look at the signs
of Allah and how they shine, yet they do not see. They see the
afflictions surrounding them, yet they do not care.
And when it is said to them that signs have appeared from the
earth and the heavens, they say, "We disbelieve in all.” Are they
waiting for Allah's punishment while the plague has come? Do
they not look at the head of the century while nearly a fifth of it
has passed, and the earth is filled with oppression and injustice?
Do they not know? Have they forgotten what their Lord said,
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ
Did Allah break this promise while He saw how people were
destroyed by the hands of the priests? They have weak eyes, fee-
ble hearts, and aspirations devoted to thinking of their stomachs,
like chicks whose sight is sharpened by seeing food. For this rea-
son, they incline fully to the earth and keep on telling lies upon
lies. Fanaticism has brought them to the position of wild beasts,
1. Verily, We Ourself have sent down this Exhortation, and most surely We
will be its Guardian (Surah al-Hijr, 15:10). [Publisher]
66
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
preventing them from accepting or even hearing the truth. So,
who among them would say, "Your mouth is speaking the truth,
and you and your father belong to Allah?" Rather, they insist on
denying, cursing, and insulting. And the wrongdoers will soon
know to what place of return they shall return.
Their religion is nothing but desires, food, and money. Do you
claim that they are believers? Surely not! In fact, they are hyp-
ocrites and liars. They abandoned their Prophet sas and took the
people of the world as companions, thinking their courtyard is
spacious. They see that the enemies are attacking the Muslims like
rain falling for years. On the other hand, there is not a single drop
of water that falls out of zeal for religion. A host of people aposta-
tised from Islam, and I saw no trace of distress on their faces. They
took Satan as an intimate friend, followed him, and included him
in their worship, so what more is there to remain?
They do not know what religion or faith is. Fresh meat and
loaves of bread are sufficient for them. They waste their lives in
idleness, while I do not see any of them as a champion in this field.
Rather, they have thoughts beside that, which make them miser-
able with sorrow. They tremble at the sight of rulers, yet they do
not fear Allah, the Lord of Glory and Honour. They walk in the
dark night, far from the everlasting light, and they neglectfully
wander off to each other, their meetings producing nothing but
strife. How many Christian books have spread harm among the
people, and Islam has become the object of laughter and blame,
but they live like ignorant, or blind people, and they listen to the
words of the Christians and then sit like laggards.
They have forgotten the commandments that were affirmed
to support Islam, and their hearts have hardened, believing that
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
67
destruction through death is slow. They are not afraid of the
spread of misguidance and witness the emergence of temptations
and the arrival of horrors. They know that the priests ruined our
lives with lies, and wanted to erase all traces of Islam, yet they
turned away from their allegations, as if they had finished their
duties and performed the obligations of their services.
Among [the scholars] are people who, during their entire lives,
did not stand up to
to 
the
opponents and spent their lives charging
believers of infidelity and calling the truthful as liars. I was proud
to honour these scholars, thinking they were pious, but when I
noticed their hidden characteristics and inner traits, I knew that
they were among the traitors, not the good and righteous. They
are hypocrites in the paths of Allah, not among the sincere chosen
ones. I saw that everything they knew and did was tainted with
hypocrisy, and their hearts were as black as the long dark night. So,
I retracted my thoughts, saying, “Surely, to Allah we belong and
to Him shall we return,” and changed my mind in pain. I became
certain that my foresight had been wrong and that the matter was
the opposite. They are a people who preferred the lowly world and
sought prestige and affluence.
eyes
They see the corruption in towns and lands, then lower their
like one who is blind. The wound has developed an infection,
but they do not see its spread. They did not respond to Allah's
Summoner, even if he sobbed and cried, yet they would respond
to an invitation of a meal of fine sheep's trotters. They do not
think to themselves: What are they doing for religion? Were they
created to eat delicious food and beautify themselves?
The land has been tainted by their corruption, and the plague
has spread throughout their countries. It is an affliction that
68
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
knows no bounds, sparing neither valley nor peak. Wherever it
settles, it transforms towns into barren wastelands. Yet, for those
who sought sanctuary in my village with sincerity and obedience,
I am hopeful that Allah will shield them from its grasp. This is a
divine promise from the Lord of Glory and Power, even if the eyes
that have not been given insight choose to deny it.
Alas for the scholars who fail to perceive what Allah has
shown them from heavens. They consumed the essence of the
head of the century as though it were a head of a goat, heedless
of the promises of the Most Gracious. Though the sun and moon
emerged following the eclipse during Ramadan, their hearts were
not cleared of darkness that would put Satan to shame. Did they
not witness these two celestial signs? Once in our own land, and
again in the territories of the adversaries who are the People of
the Cross?
Why do they persist [in disbelief], ignoring the signs of
Allah? Do I seek a reward from them, so they are burdened by
its weight? Let them run away from the signs of Allah; they will
come to know. Do they not perceive the rampant corruption, the
prevailing temptations, the erosion of morality, and the weaken-
ing of faith? People are engulfed in a fire akin to Hell. Who can
bring about reform when corruption and deception reigns?
How can it be thought that these corruptions have not reached
their ears, nor has news of them reached their men and women?
For this is a shrewd, majestic, and devastating calamity, and not a
day nor a month passes without these tribulations increasing and
these temptations occurring. Yet, despite that, the scholars chose
a hideous state, and they left a trace that might reflect adversely
upon their honour.
 GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
69
And the priests have planted their crops like locust nymphs,
leaving no trace of piety and making the country a barren, dry
land. So look, is there any protected land or town not attacked?
They spread all kinds of evil whispers and contrived a plot beyond
measure. They misled Muslim youth, ignorant and educated, and
attracted them with all kinds of tricks and enticements, causing
them to apostatise and become like fish taken out of water.
Similarly, they concealed their intentions and displayed their
softness in this country, multiplying everywhere, even more than
locusts. So ask these scholars: what did they do during these
calamities? Did they support the cause of Islam, fulfil their duty
of providing solace, and strive for healing? Or did they hide away
in their rooms, shrouded in the veils of the deceased?
Islam faced a period of drought, a calamitous and miserable
time. Who among them feels their heart melt for these sorrows,
and whose heart weeps over the widespread corruption caused by
the People of the Cross?
Surely not! Rather, those who claim, "We are the scholars of
the Ummah and the inheritors of the religion of the Gracious
[God]," have satisfied the offspring of Satan with their deeds. They
engage in nothing but immorality, labelling others as immoral and
disbelievers, and misleading the Ummah with falsehoods. Their
wickedness has led them to issue fatwas proclaiming that victory
lies in plotting, and that it brings down tables spread with food.
They monitor these opportunities like hunters, even through the
mediation of rulers and chiefs.
They resembled the Jews in all their characteristics, and
matched their conditions, adding ignorance to their ignorance.
They love to be praised for what they have not done, and they
70
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
get angry if they are not glorified. They are arrogant like sultans,
but they are nothing but worms of the earth. They expect obedi-
ence from people, yet they possess neither reason nor ingenuity.
Whoever disagrees with them is treated as if they have fallen from
a great height or abandoned as a divorcee. They prohibit people
from their wives if their desires are not fulfilled. There is no type
of lie that does not come out of their mouths, and there is no evil
that does not exist within them.
A
group
of them have their hearts enamoured with the pas-
sion of Jihad, they tempt the ignorant to smite the necks by sharp
swords and assassinate every stranger and wayfarer. They do not
have mercy on the weak, nor do they listen to screams and wail-
ing, or fear Allah.
So woe to them and what they do! Will they slay people
while they do good? Will they kill those who do not kill people
for religion, spread benevolence, establish discretion, and do not
use sword and spear for religion? Rather, they are the resort of
the hopeless and the shelter at the sudden calamity. Their endow-
ments come upon request heavier than rain lashes from clouds.
They support those who fear the attack of disasters, fight those
who confront them at war, repel what have subjected you to dis-
tress, and prepare for you reasons for joy. Will you strike the necks
of these protectors?
I do not understand the secret of these invaders. Is this sup-
porting religion or desires? What is this Jihad that modesty refuses
to accept? It is also not accepted by sound reason and intelligence.
What is the matter with the people who is lead these scholars?
Nay, their likeness is like wolves or tigers or dogs. By Allah, they
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
71
are nothing but preachers of the lowly world, even if they appear
wearing a turban or a hat.
This Jihad is nothing but a trap of destruction, which makes
them laugh today and cry tomorrow. Will they slaughter the doers
of good deeds with knives? Where is this commandment and in
which guidance? Is this action permissible by the sound mind? Is
it acceptable by the good nature? Rather, they clothed themselves
with impudence, stripped of friendship, and supported the infi-
dels in disdaining Islam, and helped them raising allegations and
throw arrows [at it]. Islam will not [be irrigated by] the running
water due the presence of these mujāhids. Rather, their presence
is a disgrace to Islam and Muslims. All goodness lies in their death
or they should be among the repentant.
Will they kill people because they turn away from the judge-
ment of the Gracious [God]? Even though, turning aside exists
in themselves as they commit indecency, immorality and disobe-
dience. So, how is it permissible for them to strike the necks of
infidels, when they deserve to have their necks struck by a sharp
sword, because they have been immoral and have chosen the life
of the ungodly?
If this type of Jihad was a religious necessity, then what is the
meaning of saving these immoral ones? Why are their heads not
cut off with sharp swords? Why are their flesh not torn with slic-
ing knives? For they became disobedient after believing, so let
muftis give a fatwa. Should these people be killed by the sword
or spear? As the primary target of this jihad is the people who
became disobedient after they converted to Islam, showed signs
of apostasy, went beyond the limits of the commandments of the
Furqan, and broke a covenant they made before the Lord.
72
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
There is no need for the Lord of the Worlds to take the groups
of those that corrupt as helpers, for He can send down torment
from the sky if He wants to destroy the unbelievers. Why does
the Holy One need the sinner? He has no need for the Jihad of
the transgressors. It the practice of Allah that He may support the
disbeliever, but He never supports the sinner and the unjust, and
likewise the jealousy of the Lord of the Worlds requires this.
By Allah, whoever assays these scholars will find that most of
them are like those who manufacture counterfeit dirhams, plating
them with silver and presenting them to people as refined, solid,
high-quality, newly minted, authentic coins made of pure silver
bars. Indeed, this is the condition of most scholars: they fear peo-
ple and do not fear their Lord, and you find most of them blind.
Had they feared their Lord, their eyes would have been opened,
and they would have seen matters rightly. They were destroyed by
relentless stinginess and extreme cowardice. No sound mind or
upright character is left in them, and they became like madmen.
They say, "We will not believe in you," they are divided into sects
and are not in agreement. While Allah has sent a servant, so they
can make him a judge in all that is in dispute between them and
to make him one of the conquerors, to submit to him with full
submission and then find not in their hearts any demur concern-
ing that which he decided. That is the arbiter that came. Those
who followed him during times of persecution, came to him with
pious hearts, enduring people's curses and fearing a curse descend-
ing from the highest heavens. These are the truly righteous, and
they are among the forgiven.
O people, you were waiting for the Messiah, and Allah mani-
fested him as He wished. Therefore, submit yourself to your Lord
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
73
and do not follow your desires. You do not consider game to be
lawful while you are in a state of pilgrimage, so how can you assert
your opinions when you have an arbiter?" The arbiter is a mercy
sent down to the believers, without him, they would still be in
disagreement.
The Mahdi appeared when the misguided people prevailed,
and the supplication of “Guide us” was heard after two hundred
years, fulfilling what your Lord said in al-Fatihah and the clear
Furqan. Allah took the covenant of the Muslims in this chapter,
and He warned them of the Jews and Christians until the Day of
Judgment. So where is the mention of the Antichrist and where
is its deafening temptation mentioned? Did Allah forget to men-
tion it when teaching this prayer? Those who are firmly grounded
in knowledge know that the name of the Antichrist is not men-
tioned in, the Discrimination, i.e. the Quran, while it is full of
mentions of the temptation of the People of the Cross, which is
the greatest trial in the Eyes of Allah that heavens may well-nigh
rend asunder because of it.
And they lived for a thousand years after the first three cen-
turies, O you who are endowed with reason. Their presence was
initially felt like the rustling of a snake as it moves and stretches.
Then, the awareness of their existence intensified until the sneaking
1. Different opinions are like birds flying in the air, and the arbiter is akin
to a safe sanctuary that safeguards from mistakes. Just as hunting is for-
bidden in the Sacred Mosque out of respect for Allah's holy land, like-
wise, following different opinions is forbidden in the presence of the
arbiter, who is infallible and has from the Lord of Glory the status of
a Sacred Mosque. Rather, the position of etiquette requires that every
matter be presented to him, and nothing is taken except from his hands.
(Author)
74
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
whisperer appeared. It was like a foetus in a sac for six thousand
years, then it was born after nine hundred years. By "years," I mean
years that came after the first three centuries. So, calculate the
time if you are among the doubters.
the
There are people who spend mountains of gold to propagate
misguidance. Have you ever seen anyone as persistent as them
in insisting on ignorance? They have established a stronghold in
your land, which they seized by force. They aim to strip you of
your piety and tarnish you with disgrace. However, what was evi-
dent from Allah has manifested, and the news of trials and trib-
ulations has come to pass. So, what darkness remains after these
dark times?
The Antichrist you perceive is merely an illusion in your minds,
while time has only revealed these tribulations and the affliction
of these evil deeds. This is a great trial in the sight of Allah, and it
almost caused the heavens to burst open and the steadfast moun-
tains to fall. They lived for a thousand years after the first three
centuries. Their existence was initially felt like the rustling of a
snake as it moves and stretches.
Then, the awareness of their presence increased until the
sneaking whisperer appeared. Misguidance and evil whispering
became widespread, and filth and impurities increased. Nine hun-
dred years have passed since he was in the womb like a foetus. And
nothing was heard from him, not even a whisper, hissing, buzzing,
or any trace of a response to Islam in writing and composition.
Those nine are the days of the Antichrist's gestation period,
and nine is typically the duration of pregnancy in most cases. If
you wish, count from the end of the three centuries to a time that
completes the number nine. Then the Antichrist was born at the
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
75
beginning of the tenth century. By “tenth century," I mean the
beginning of the hundred years that follow the first three centu-
ries. Before that, it was like a foetus in the womb, silent and unre-
sponsive to Islam, neither with a word nor a paragraph. After its
birth, it became like a torrent originating from mountain water,
heading towards the valley, lowland, and chasm. Then it grew
strong and powerful, inciting tribulations the likes of which have
not been seen from the time of Adamas until the end of days. It
completely disrupted the affairs of Islam and consumed many of
its followers, as you can see, O discerning people. It spread corrup-
tion and misguidance throughout the earth, both right and left,
leading our religion towards destruction.
Then the Messiah appeared, at the head of a thousand full
moons, and descended from Allah with a spear. He began to track
and hunt him down as one would hunt in a thicket. Then he cast
it at the Gate of Ludd and ended all disputes with a single blow."
So, do not slacken or grieve, for Allah is with you if you are
with Him in honesty and obedience. And Allah had already
helped you at Badr² when you were weak, and now the full moon
has been returned to you the second time, surely, victory is near,
but it will not be achieved by the sword or fierce battle, but by
1. The first town in which people pledged their allegiance to me was called
Ludhiana, and it was the first land where evil people rose to insult me.
Since the pledge of allegiance of the sincere people was a spear to kill
the accursed Antichrist, by spreading the clear truth, it was indicated
in the Hadith that the Messiah would kill the Antichrist at the Gate of
Ludd with one blow. So, Ludd is an abbreviation for the word Ludhiana,
and this is obvious to discerning people. (Author)
2. The literal meaning of Badr is full moon. [Publisher]
76
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD
AS
supplications, resolve, and prayers. So, do not harbour evil
thoughts. Come to me like the Companions and let not death
overtake you except when you are in a state of submission. Invoke
blessings upon Muhammad, the Best of Creation $as. This century
is like the night of a full moon in reckoning, and like the Night of
Destiny in status. So, receive glad tidings of your full moon and
await the days of victory.
The Editors of Magazines & Newspapers
Perhaps you might suggest that those involved in magazines
and newspapers are deserving of reforming the corruption of
countries and homes. However, I say, may Allah have mercy on
you, this is a misguided notion. Can those individuals truly be
absolved [of spreading] the diseases of souls and whisperings of
priests? Indeed, there is no doubt that these industries can benefit
our people if they are managed properly. They can serve as a guide
to uncharted territories, lead to sources of sustenance, and sup-
port religious matters.
Newspapers are a mirror that show the absent as if it were pres-
ent, and the past as if it were the present. They serve as a link to
some hidden things. Indeed, they may assist in adjudicating cases.
They reveal both what is near and far, much like mirrors, and pre-
pare lessons for those with understanding. They show the paths
to both salvation and ruin, and inform you every day about the
changes. It narrates how assemblies grow stronger and how great
water sources diminish. It tells of how stables become deserted
and how sovereignty is taken away from leaders, following their
GUIDANCE FOR PERCEIVING MINDS
77
wealth and affluence. It recounts the stories of victorious warriors
and those who are defeated, those who dominate and those who
fail.
If there were no newspapers, reports would be cut off, coun-
tries would remain ignorant, and no one would know about the
righteous and the good. The chain of ideas and the completion of
insights would be severed, leading to the loss of many opinions
and experiences from people of reason and wisdom. There would
be no way to understand the people involved in politics or to rec-
ognise those who are reasonable and diligent.
Without history, people would regress to a primitive state,
losing the sequence of days and years. Its necessity has been recog-
nised since swords were drawn from their sheaths and pens were
sharpened to record it. We cannot compare the firsts and the lasts
except through the work of historians; they carry the traces of
the builders of glory and disseminate the memories of our most
eminent forebears. History is indeed an adornment of religion,
reflecting the practice of Allah in His Books and the clear Furqan.
A religion that does not embrace history and does not dwell in
its fortress, is akin to a house built in a flood-prone area, vulnera-
ble to losing its possessions and reduced to mere dust under horse
hooves. Whoever forsakes the staff of history walks as if lame,
stumbling with each step, inviting plunder due to profound igno-
rance. Those who dwell within, risk squandering the pearls they
amassed in their affluence. Perhaps Satan make them forget what
the pillars of faith are, leaving their house bereft of treasures. Thus,
the fate of such a religion may be stagnation, tainted by various
corruptions.
A religion supported by history, newspapers, and records
78
HADRAT MIRZA GHULAM AHMAD AS
ensures its remembrance will endure. It is akin to a towering palm
tree, bearing fruit of all kinds throughout the seasons, yielding bars
of silver and pure gold from the metals of truthfulness. Its news
soothes troubled hearts in times of worry and anguish, sharing the
stories of the afflicted with those in despair, fortifying resolve to
confront great challenges. By recounting the tales of honourable
young men, it imbues hesitant hearts with courage, for the example
of valorous youth strengthens resolve and emboldens the spirit.
It is necessary to thank those who uncover the traits of past
times or the characteristics of the people from those eras, reveal-
ing both the weaknesses of Islam and the strengths of the People
of the Cross. How much ignorance has befallen our people due to
their lack of attention to history and the news of different times
and places. The Christians presented some stories to them, dis-
torting and altering them, as is the custom of the wicked. This led
to their destruction and brought their affairs to ruin and disgrace.
They undermined their faith, and even attracted a a group
of them
to their crosses. This situation exacerbates the troubles of rational
people and incites regret over the actions of the corrupt.
Despite these virtues, most editors in our time have suc-
cumbed to vices, accumulating faults that erase all their good
qualities. They have abandoned religion, sincerity, and honesty.
A torrent of lies flows from their pens, and they shed the blood
of truth when swayed by encouragement or intimidation. They
praise with ulterior motives and curse with hidden agendas, mak-
ing their desires their compass at every turn. They turn away, dis-
dain, and obscure the truth, avoiding direct confrontation but
attacking for the sake of corruption. They lie frequently and rarely
speak the truth, wandering aimlessly in every direction. They offer
